your-repo/
├── syllabus/
│   ├── english.txt
│   ├── mathematics.txt
│   ├── biology.txt
│   ├── physics.txt
│   ├── chemistry.txt
│   ├── economics.txt
│   ├── government.txt
│   └── ...
├── questions_*.json
├── tutor.py
├── main.py
└── requirements.txtLITERATURE IN ENGLISH 
 

GENERAL OBJECTIVES 
 

AIM: 
The aims of the Unified Tertiary Matriculation Examination (UTME) syllabus in Literature in 
English is to prepare the candidates for the Board’s examination. Which are to generate, 
deepen and sustain interest in literature in English generally, and create awareness and 
understanding of the principles and techniques of all the genres of literature from diverse 
cultures.  
 
OBJECTIVES: 
   It is designed to test their achievement of the course objectives which are to: 
 

• stimulate and sustain their interest in Literature in English; 

• create an awareness of the general principles of Literature and the functions of 
language: 

• appreciate literary works of all genres and across all cultures; 

• apply the knowledge of Literature in English to the understanding of cultural 
literature, political and economic activities in the society. 

 
 

DETAILED SYLLABUS 
 

 
TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 
1. DRAMA Candidates should be able to:  

a. Types:  
i. Tragedy a.i. identify the various types of drama; 
ii. Comedy  
iii. Tragicomedy a.ii. analyse the contents of the various 
iv. Melodrama types of drama; 
v. Farce   
vi. Opera etc.    a.iii. compare and contrast the features 

 of different types of drama. 
b.  Dramatic Techniques  

  
i. Characterisation  
ii. Dialogue b.i. demonstrate adequate knowledge 
iii. Flashback of dramatic techniques and stage 
iv. Mime  directions used in each prescribed 
v. Costume text; 
vi. Music/Dance  
vii. Décor/scenery  
viii. Acts/Scenes b.ii. differentiate between styles of 
ix. Soliloquy/aside selected playwrights; 
x. Figures of Speech.  



  
c.  Interpretation of the Prescribed Texts  

i. Theme c.i determine the theme of any 
ii. Plot prescribed text; 
iii. Socio-political context  
iv. Setting  c.ii.  identify the plot of the play; 

  
c.iii. apply the lessons of the play to 

social reality. 
 
c.iv. identify the spatial setting and 

temporal period of the play. 
 

 
TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 
  

2. PROSE Candidates should be able to: 
  

a.  Types: Prose fiction a.i. differentiate between types of novel. 
i. Fiction  

• Novel  
• Novella/Novelette a.ii. identify the category that each prescribed 
• Short story text belongs to; 

  
ii. Non-fiction a.iii. analyse the components of each type of 

• Biography prose; 

• Autobiography  

• Memoir  

 a.iv. identify the balance of facts and fiction 

iii. Faction: combination of fact and in literary faction.  

fiction  

  

b. Narrative Techniques/Devices: b.i. identify the narrative techniques used in 

i. Point of view each of the prescribed texts; 

  
b.ii. determine an author’s narrative style; 

• Omniscient  
 

• First Person 
 

• Second person 
 

• Third person  
• Stream of consciousness  
• Epiphany   

   
  

ii. Characterisation b.iii. distinguish between one type of 
• Round, flat, foil, hero, character from another; 

antihero villain, heroine. etc  
  

iii.  Language  b.iv. Grammar, diction and clarity of 
 expression. 



  
c. Textual Analysis c.i.  determine the thematic pre-occupation of 

i. Theme the prescribed text; 
ii. Plot  
iii. Setting (Temporal/Spatial) c.ii.  indicate the plot of the novel;  
iv. Socio-political context  

 c.iii. identify the setting and period/timing of 
 the novel. 
  
 c.iv. relate the prescribed text to social 

 reality. 
  
   
3.  POETRY  Candidates should be able to: 
a. Types:  

i. Sonnet a.i.   identify different types of poetry; 
ii. Ode  
iii. Lyrics a.ii. identify the distinctive features of the 
iv. Elegy poetic types. 
v. Ballad  
vi. Panegyric  
vii. Epic 
viii. Blank Verse, etc. 

 

 

TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 
b. Poetic devices b.i. determine the devices used by various 

  poets; 
i. Imagery  
ii. Sound (Rhyme/Rhythm, b.ii. show how poetic devices are used for 

repetition, pun, onomatopoeia, aesthetic effect in each poem; 
etc.)  

iii. Diction b.iii. identify the figure of speech in the texts. 
iv. Persona   

 b.iv. Show how poetic devices convey 
 message and meaning. 

  
c. Appreciation c.i. Deduce the poet’s thematic preoccupation 

i. Thematic preoccupation from the poem; 
ii. Socio-political relevance  
iii. Style. c.ii. appraise poetry as an art with moral 

 values; 
  
 c.iii. apply the lessons from the poem to 
 social reality. 
  
  
  
  



  
  

4. GENERAL LITERARY TERMS Candidates should be able to: 
AND PRINCIPLES  

a. Literary terms: a.i.   identify literary terms that are specific to 
foreshadowing, suspense, theatre, drama, prose and poetry; 
monologue, dialogue, soliloquy,  
symbolism, protagonist, antagonist, a.ii.  identify areas of overlap in all the genres 
figures of speech, satire, stream of e.g. verse in drama and poetry, narration in 
consciousness, synecdoche, all the genres. 
metonymy, etc,   
in addition to those listed above under  
the different genres.   

  
  
5. LITERARY  APPRECIATION  
  
Unseen passages/extracts from Drama, Candidates should be able to: 
Prose and Poetry.  

 i. identify literary devices used in a 
 given passage/extract; 

ii. provide an interpretation of the 
given passage/extract; 

iii. relate the extract to true life 
experiences. 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
A LIST OF SELECTED AFRICAN AND NON-AFRICAN PLAYS, NOVELS AND 

POEMS 
 

 
Drama: 
African: 

i.  Efua Sutherland:   Marriage of Anansewa  
 
Non-African: 
 

i.  Williams Shakespeare:   Anthony and Cleopatra 
 
Prose: 
 
African: 
i. Pede Hollist:  So the Path Does not Die  
 
ii. Elma Shaw:  Redemption Road 
 
Non African: 
i. Susanne Bellefeuille: Path of Lucas: The Journey He Endured 

 
Poetry: 
 
African: 
i. Gabriel Okara:  Once Upon a Time 
 
ii. Elizabeth L.A. Kamara: New Tongue 
 
iii. Wole Soyinka:  Night 
 
iv. Niyi Osundare:  Not my Business 
 
v. S.O.H. Afriyie-Vidza:  Hearty Garlands 
 
vi. Syl Cheney-Coker:  The Breast of the Sea   
 
Non-African: 
i. Lord Byron:   She Walks in Beauty 
 
ii. Geoffery Chaucer:  The Nun’s Priest Tale (shortened) 
 
iii. Fleur Adcock:   The Telephone Call 
 
iv. Wilfred Wilson Gipson: The Stone 



 

RECOMMENDED TEXTS 
 
1.  ANTHOLOGIES 
 

1. Obafemi, O. and Agoi (eds) Of shadows and Rainbows –Musings in Times of Covid 
(An Anthology of poems, plays and short stories) PEN Nigeria, Online 
 

2. Hayward, J. (ed.) (1968) The Penguin Book of English Verse, London Penguin 
 

3. Johnson, R.,Ker, D, Maduka,C. Obafemi,O (eds.) (1996) New Poetry from Africa, 
Ibadan: UP Plc 
 
 

4. Kermode, F. (1964) Oxford Anthology of English Literature, Vol. II, London: OUP 
 

5. Nduke Ofiono and Odoh Diego Okenyodo (eds) Camouflage; Best of contemporary 
writing from Nigeria, an anthology of new Nigerian writers, mace books association, 
2021, New edition. 
 

6. Parker, E.W. (ed.) (1980) A Peagent of Longer Poems London: Longman 
 

7. Senanu, K. E. and Vincent, T. (eds.) (1993) A Selection of African Poetry, Lagos: 
Longman 
 

8. Soyinka, W. (ed.) (1987) Poems of Black Africa, Ibadan: Heinemann 
 
 
2. CRITICAL TEXTS 

 
Abrams, M. H. (1981) A Glossary of Literary Terms, (4th Edition) New York, Holt 
Rinehalt and Winston 
 
Emeaba, O. E. (1982) A Dictionary of Literature, Aba:  Inteks Press 
 
Murphy, M. J. (1972) Understanding Unseen, An Introduction to English Poetry and 
English Novel for Overseas Students, George Allen and Unwin Ltd.

Use of English 
 

USE OF ENGLISH 
 
1. GENERAL OBJECTIVES 
 

The aim of the Unified Tertiary Matriculation Examination (UTME) syllabus in Use of English is to 
guide candidates in their preparation for the Board’s examination.  It is designed to evaluate the 
candidates’ ability to: 
 
(i) communicate effectively in both written and spoken English; and 
(ii) use English Language for learning at the tertiary level. 

 
2. The syllabus consists of three sections: 
 

SECTION A:  Comprehension and Summary 
SECTION B:  Lexis and Structure  
SECTION C: Oral Forms 

 
3. DETAILED SYLLABUS/CONTENTS 
 

TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

A. Comprehension and Summary Candidates should be able to: 
 (a) description i. identify main points/topic sentences in passages; 
 (b) narration ii. determine implied meanings; 
 (c) exposition iii. identify the grammatical functions of words, 
 (d) argumentation/persuasion phrases, clauses and figurative /idiomatic 
 expressions; and  
 (i) Each of the three passages to be set (one iv. deduce or infer the writers’ intentions including 

will be a cloze test) should reflect various mood, attitude to the subject matter and opinion. 
disciplines and be about 200 words long.  

 
 (ii) Questions on the passages will test the 

following: 
 
  (a) Comprehension of the whole or part 

of each passage. 
 
  (b) Comprehension of words, phrases, 

clauses, sentences, figures of speech 
and idioms as used in the passages. 

 
  (c) Coherence and logical reasoning 

(deductions, inferences, etc.). 
 
  (d) Approved Reading Text. 
 
  (e) Synthesis of ideas from the 

passages. 
 
 
 
 
 

198 
 



Use of English 
 

TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

NOTE: 
         Synthesis of ideas means the art of combining 

distinct or separate pieces of information to 
form a complete whole as summary. 

 
 
B. Lexis and Structure Candidates should be able to: 
  
 (a) synonyms i. identify words and expressions in their ordinary, 
 (b) antonyms figurative and idiomatic contexts; 
 (c) clause and sentence patterns ii. determine similar and opposite meanings of words; 
 (d) word classes and their functions iii. differentiate between correct and incorrect spellings; 
 (e) mood, tense, aspect, number, iv. identify various grammatical patterns in use; and 

agreement/concord, degree (positive, v. interpret information conveyed in sentences. 
comparative and superlative) and question  
tags 

           (f)     mechanics 
  (g) ordinary usage, figurative usage and 

idiomatic usage. 
 
NOTE: 
 Idioms to be tested are those that are formal and 

expressed in Standard British English. (SBE). 
 
C. Oral Forms Candidates should be able to: 
  
 (a) Vowels (monothongs, diphthongs and i. make distinctions among vowel types; 

triphthongs) ii. differentiate among consonant types; and 
 (b) Consonants (including clusters) iii. identify correct pronunciation of individual words and 
 (c) Rhymes (including homophones) articulation of connected speech. 
 (d) Word stress (monosyllabic and polysyllabic)  
 (e) Emphatic stress (in connected speech) 
 
NOTE: 
 Emphatic stress involves the placement of stress on 

words in an utterance for the purpose of emphasis. 
 

 

  

199 
 



Use of English 
 
D. THE STRUCTURE OF THE EXAMINATION 

 

SECTION A:  Comprehension and Summary 

(a) 1comprehension passage -   5 questions    

(b) 1 summary passage  -    5 questions  

(c) 1 cloze passage -   10 questions 

(d) 1 reading text -   5 questions 

   

 

SECTION B:  Lexis and Structure  

(a) Sentence interpretation -   5 questions  

(b) Antonyms -   5 questions 

(c) Synonyms -   5questions 

(d)  Basic Grammar -   10 questions 

   

 

SECTION C: Oral Forms   

a) Vowels -            2 questions 

b) Consonants -      2 questions 

c) Rhymes -           2 questions 

d) Word Stress -    2 questions  

e) Emphatic Stress -  2 questions 

 Total:  60 questions   

 
 
  

200 
 



Use of English 
 

RECOMMENDED TEXTS 

 Adedimeji, M. A (2021) Doses of Grammar. Patigi. Ahman Pategi University Press. 

  Attah, M. O. (2013). Practice in Spoken English for Intermediate and Advanced Learners. Maiduguri: University of     

 Maiduguri Press. 

Bamgbose, A. (2002). English Lexis and Structure for Senior Secondary Schools and Colleges (Revised Edition).  

Ibadan: Heinemann. 

Banjo, A., Adeniran A., Akano, A. and Onoga, U. (2004) New Oxford Secondary English Course Book six  

for Senior Secondary Schools. Ibadan: University Press Plc. 

Caesar, O. J. (2003). Essential Oral English for Schools and Colleges. Lagos: Tonad Publishers Limited. 

Jones, D. (2011). Cambridge English Pronouncing Dictionary. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Egbe, D. I (1996). Mastering English Usage and Communication Skills. Lagos: Tisons. 

Elugbe, B. (2000). Oral English for Schools and Colleges. Ibadan: Heinemann. 

Grant, N. J. H., Nnamonu, S.  and Jowitt, D. (1998) Senior English Project 3. (New Edition) Harlow: Longman. 

Idowu., O. O., Sogbesan, T. S., Adofo, A. K., Burgess, D. F. and Burgess, L. J. (1998) Round-up English: A Complete  

Guide, Lagos: Longman. 

Idris, U. (2001). Oral English at Your Fingertips for Schools and Colleges. Lagos: M. Youngbrain Publishers. 

Igiligi, E. C. and Ogenyi, S. O. (2010) Grammar and Composition in the G.S.M. Age. Enugu: Joe Hills Production  

Services. 

Jauro, L. B. (2013). Oral English for Schools and Colleges: A Teaching and Learning Approach. Yola: Paraclete  

Publishers. 

Nnamonu, S. and Jowitt, D. (1989) Common Errors in English. Lagos: Longman. 

Obinna, M. F. (2001) University Matriculation Use of English. (Fourth Edition). Port Harcourt: Sunray Books  

Limited. 

Ogunsanwo, O., Duruaku, A. B.C., Ezechukwu, J. and Nwachukwu, U. I. (2005) Countdown English Language  

(Revised Edition). Ibadan: Evans Brothers. 

Olatoye, S. (2006) The Silent Teacher. Ado-Ekiti: Segun and Sons Enterprises. 

Oluikpe, B. O. A., Nnaemeka, B. A., Obah, T. Y., Otagburuagu, E. J., Onuigbo, S. and Ogbonna, E. A. (1998)  

Intensive English for Senior Secondary School 3. Onitsha: Africana. First Publishers. 

201 
 



Use of English 
 
Tomori, S. H. O. (2000) Objective Tests for School Certificate English: Practice in Lexis, Structure and Idiom  

(Reprinted Edition).  Ibadan: Heinemann. 

Ukwuegbu, C., Okoro, O., Idris, A. U., Okebukola, F. O. and Owokade, C. O. (2002) Catch-up English for  

SSCE/UME. Ibadan: Heinemann. 

202

MATHEMATICS 
 

GENERAL OBJECTIVES 
 
The aim of the Unified Tertiary Matriculation Examination (UTME) syllabus in Mathematics is to 
prepare the candidates for the Board’s examination.  It is designed to test the achievement of the 
course objectives which are to: 

(1) acquire computational and manipulative skills; 
(2) develop precise, logical and formal reasoning skills; 
(3) develop deductive skills in interpretation of graphs, diagrams and data; 
(4) apply mathematical concepts to resolve issues in daily living. 

This syllabus is divided into five sections: 

I. Number and Numeration; 
II. Algebra; 
III. Geometry/Trigonometry; 
IV. Calculus; 
V. Statistics. 

DETAILED SYLLABUS 
 



TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

SECTION I:  NUMBER AND     
                     NUMERATION  
1. Number bases/Modular Arithmetic: Candidates should be able to: 

(a)  operations in different number bases i. perform four basic operations (x,+,-,÷);  
from 2    to 10;  

ii. convert one base to another; 
(b) conversion from one base to another 

iii. perform operations in modulo arithmetic. 
including fractional parts; 

 
(c) modular arithmetic. 

 
 

 
 

 
2. Fractions, Decimals, Approximations 

Candidates should be able to: 
and Percentages: 

i. perform basic operations  
(a)  fractions and decimals; 
(b) significant figures; (x,+,-,÷)on fractions and decimals; 

(c) decimal places; ii. express to specified number of significant figures 

(d) percentage errors; and decimal places; 

(e) simple interest; iii. calculate simple interest, profit and loss per cent; 

(f) profit and loss percent; ratio proportion, rate and percentage error; 

(g) ratio, proportion and rate; iv. solve problems involving share and VAT. 

(h) shares and valued added tax (VAT).  

  

3. Indices, Logarithms and Surds: Candidates should be able to: 

(a)  laws of indices; i. apply the laws of indices in calculation; 

(b) equations involving indices; ii. establish the relationship between indices and 

(c) standard form; logarithms in solving problems; 

(d) laws of logarithm; iii. solve equations involving indices; 

(e) logarithm of any positive number to a iv. solve problems in different bases in logarithms; 

given base; v.  simplify and rationalize surds; 

(f) change of bases in logarithm and vi. perform basic operations on surds. 

application;  

(g) relationship between indices and  

logarithm;  

(h) Surds.  

  

4. Sets: Candidates should be able to: 

(a) types of sets; i.     identify types of sets, i.e.  empty, universal, 

(b) algebra of sets; complements, subsets, finite, infinite and disjoint 

(c) Venn diagrams and their applications. sets;  

 ii. solve problems involving cardinality of sets; 

 iv. iii.    solve set problems using symbols;  

 v. iv.  use Venn diagrams to solve problems involving 

 not more than 3 sets. 

  

SECTION II: ALGEBRA  

  

1.  Polynomials: Candidates should be able to: 

(a) change of subject of formula; i. find the subject of the formula of a given 

(b) addition, subtraction, multiplication and equation; 

division of polynomials; ii. apply factor and remainder theorem to factorize a 

(c) factorization of polynomials of degree not given expression; 

exceeding 3; iii. multiply, divide polynomials of degree not more 

(d) roots of polynomials not exceeding degree 3; than 3 and determine values of defined and 

(e) factor and remainder theorems; undefined expression; 



TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

(f) simultaneous equations including one linear iv. factorize by regrouping difference of two squares, 
one quadratic; perfect squares and cubic expressions; etc. 

(g) graphs of polynomials of degree not greater v. solve simultaneous equations – one linear, one 
than 3. quadratic; 

 vi. interpret graphs of polynomials including 
 applications to maximum and minimum values. 
  
  
  

2. Variation: Candidates should be able to: 
(a) direct;  
(b) inverse; i. solve problems involving direct, inverse, joint 
(c) joint; and partial variations; 
(d) partial; ii. solve problems on percentage increase and 
(e) percentage increase and decrease. decrease in variation. 

  
3. Inequalities: Candidates should be able to: 
(a)  analytical and graphical solutions of linear i.   solve problems on linear and quadratic  

inequalities;      inequalities; 
(b) quadratic inequalities with integral roots ii.   interpret graphs of inequalities. 

only.  
  

4. Progression: Candidates should be able to: 
 i. determine the nth term of a progression; 
(a) nth term of a progression; ii. compute the sum of A. P. and G.P; 
(b) sum of A. P. and G. P. iii. sum to infinity of a given G.P. 

  
5. Binary Operations: Candidates should be able to: 

(a)  properties of closure, commutativity, i. solve problems involving closure, 
associativity and distributivity; commutativity, associativity and distributivity; 

(b) identity and inverse elements (simple ii. solve problems involving identity and inverse 
cases only). elements. 
  
  
  

6. Matrices and Determinants:  Candidates should be able to: 
(a) algebra of matrices not exceeding 3 x 3; i.   perform basic operations(x,+,-,÷) on 
(b) determinants of matrices not exceeding 

matrices; 
3 x 3; 

ii.   calculate determinants; 
(c) inverses of 2 x 2 matrices; 

iii. compute inverses of 2 x 2 matrices. 
[excluding quadratic and higher degree 

 
equations]. 

 
 

 
 

 
SECTION III:  GEOMETRY AND          

 
TRIGONOMETRY 

 
 

Candidates should be able to: 
1. Euclidean Geometry: 

i.   identify various types of     lines and angles; 
(a) Properties of angles and lines 

ii. solve problems involving polygons; 
(b) Polygons: triangles, quadrilaterals and 

iii. calculate angles using circle theorems; 
general polygons; 

iv. identify construction procedures of special 
(c) Circles: angle properties, cyclic; 

angles, e.g. 30º, 45º, 60º, 75º, 90º etc. 
quadrilaterals and intersecting chords; 

 
(d) construction. 



TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

  
2.      Mensuration: Candidates should be able to: 

(a)  lengths and areas of plane geometrical  
figures; i. calculate the perimeters and areas of triangles, 

(b)   lengths of arcs and chords of a circle; quadrilaterals, circles and composite figures; 
(c) Perimeters and areas of sectors and ii. find the length of an arc, a chord, perimeters 

segments of circles; and areas of sectors and segments of circles; 
(d)    surface areas and volumes of simple iii. calculate total surface areas and volumes of 

solids and composite figures; cuboids, cylinders. cones, pyramids, prisms, 
(e) the earth as a sphere: longitudes and spheres and composite figures; 

latitudes. iv. determine the distance between two points on 
 the earth’s surface. 
  
  

3. Loci: Candidates should be able to: 
locus in 2 dimensions based on geometric   identify and interpret loci relating to parallel 
principles relating to lines and curves. lines, perpendicular bisectors, angle bisectors and 

 circles. 
  

4.  Coordinate Geometry: Candidates should be able to: 
(a) midpoint and gradient of a line i. determine the midpoint and gradient of a line 

segment; segment; 
(b) distance between two points; ii. find the distance between two points; 
(c) parallel and perpendicular lines; iii. identify conditions for parallelism and 
(d) equations of straight lines. perpendicularity; 

 iv. find the equation of a line in the two-point 
 form, point-slope form, slope intercept form 
 and the general form. 
  
  
5. Trigonometry: Candidates should be able to: 

(a) trigonometrical ratios of angles; i. calculate the sine, cosine and tangent of angles 
(b) angles of elevation and depression;  between - 360º ≤ Ɵ ≤ 360º; 
(c) bearings; ii. apply these special angles, e.g. 30º, 45º, 60º, 
(d) areas and solutions of triangle; 75º, 90º, 1050, 135º to solve simple problems in 
(e) graphs of sine and cosine; trigonometry; 
(f) sine and cosine formulae. iii. solve problems involving angles of elevation 

 and depression; 
 iv. solve problems involving bearings; 
 v. apply trigonometric formulae to find areas of 
 triangles; 
 vi. solve problems involving sine and cosine 
 graphs. 
  
SECTION IV:  CALCULUS  
  
      I. Differentiation: Candidates should be able to: 

(a)    limit of a function; i. find the limit of a function; 
(b)   differentiation of explicit   ii. differentiate explicit algebraic and simple 
        algebraic and simple  trigonometrical functions. 
        trigonometrical functions –     
        sine, cosine and tangent.   

  
      2.Application of differentiation: Candidates should be able to: 



TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

         (a)   rate of change; solve problems involving applications of rate of 
           (b)  maxima and minima. change, maxima and minima. 
  

3.   Integration: Candidates should be able to: 
       (a)   integration of explicit  i. solve problems of integration involving 
              algebraic and simple  algebraic and simple trigonometric 
              trigonometrical functions; functions; 

            (b)  area under the curve. ii. calculate area under the curve (simple cases 
 only). 
  

SECTION V:  STATISTICS  
  
1. Representation of data: Candidates should be able to: 

(a)  frequency distribution; i. identify and interpret frequency distribution 
(b)  histogram, bar chart and pie chart. tables; 

 ii. interpret information on histogram, bar chat 
 and pie chart. 
  
2. Measures of Location: Candidates should be able to: 

(a)  mean, mode and median of ungrouped i. calculate the mean, mode and median of 
and grouped data – (simple cases only); ungrouped and grouped data (simple cases 

(b) cumulative frequency. only); 
 ii. use Ogive to find the median, quartiles and 
 percentiles. 
  
  
3. Measures of Dispersion: Candidates should be able to: 
        range, mean deviation, variance and standard calculate the range, mean deviation, variance and 

deviation. standard deviation of ungrouped and grouped data. 
  
  
4. Permutation and Combination: Candidates should be able to: 

(a)   Linear and circular arrangements;  solve simple problems involving permutation and 
(b)  Arrangements involving repeated objects. combination.  

  
  
5. Probability:  
  (a)  experimental probability (tossing of coin,  Candidates should be able to: 
         throwing of a dice etc);     solve simple problems in probability (including 
  (b)  Addition and multiplication of probabilities  addition and multiplication). 
         (mutual and independent cases).  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 

  

RECOMMENDED TEXTS 

Adelodun A. A. (2000)Distinction in  Mathematics:  Comprehensive  Revision Text, (3rd Edition)   
Ado –Ekiti: FNPL. 
 
Anyebe, J. A. B. (1998)   Basic Mathematics for Senior Secondary Schools and Remedial Students 

in Higher Institutions, Lagos: Kenny Moore. 
 
Channon, J. B. Smith, A. M. (2001)New General Mathematics for West Africa SSS 1 to 3, Lagos: 

Longman. 
 
 
David –Osuagwu, M. et al. (2000)New School Mathematics for Senior Secondary Schools, Onitsha:  

Africana -   FIRST Publishers. 
 
Egbe. E et al (2000)Further Mathematics, Onitsha: Africana – FIRST Publishers 
 
Ibude, S. O. et al.. (2003)Algebra and Calculus for Schools and Colleges:  LINCEL Publishers. 
 
Tuttuh – Adegun M. R. et al. (1997)Further Mathematics Project Books 1 to 3, Ibadan:  NPS 

Educational 
 
Wisdomline Pass at Once JAMB.

Physics 
 

PHYSICS 
 

GENERAL OBJECTIVES 
 
The aim of the Unified Tertiary Matriculation Examination (UTME) syllabus in Physics is 

to prepare the candidates for the Board’s examination.  It is designed to test their 

achievement of the course objectives, which are to: 

(1) sustain their interest in physics; 

(2) develop attitude relevant to physics that encourage accuracy, precision and    

objectivity; 

(3) interpret physical phenomena, laws, definitions, concepts and other theories; 

(4) demonstrate the ability to solve correctly physics problems using relevant theories 

and concepts. 

 
DETAILED SYLLABUS 

 
TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

  
1. MEASUREMENTS AND UNITS Candidates should be able to: 

(ai) Fundamental Units:  i. identify the units of length, area 
Length, mass, time, electric charge, and volume; 
temperature, luminous intensity,   ii. use different measuring 
amount of   substance. instruments; 

 iii. determine the lengths, surface 
 areas and volume of regular and 
 irregular bodies; 

(aii)     Derived Units:   
           Weight, area, volume, force, speed etc. iv. identify the unit of mass; 
 v. use simple beam balance, e.g.  

 Buchart’s balance and chemical 
 balance; 

(b)       Measuring Instruments:  vi. identify the unit of time; 
venier caliper, metre rule, micrometer     vii. use different time-measuring 
screw gauge, measuring cylinder, stop devices; 
watch and beam balance.  
 viii. relate the fundamental physical 

(c)   Fundamental physical quantities quantities to their units; 
  

     

172 
 



Physics 
 

TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

  
(d)  Derived physical quantities and their ix. deduce the units of derived 

  units physical quantities; 
(i) Combinations of fundamental quantities  

and determination of their units; x. determine the dimensions of 
 physical quantities; 

(e)     Dimensions xi. use the dimensions to determine 
(i) definition of dimensions the units of physical quantities; 
(ii) simple examples xii. test the homogeneity of an 

 equation; 
  
 xiii. determine the accuracy of 
 measuring instruments;  

(f)    Limitations of experimental xiv. estimate simple errors;  
 measurements xv. express measurements in standard 

 (i)    accuracy of measuring      form. 
         instruments;  

(ii)  simple estimation of errors;  
(iii)  significant figures;  
(iv)  standard form.  

  
  
 (2a)    Scalars and Vectors Candidates should be able to: 

(i) definition of scalar and vector quantities; i. distinguish between scalar and 
(ii) examples of scalar and vector quantities;  vector quantities; 
(iii) relative velocity; ii. give examples of scalar and vector 
(iv) resolution of vectors into two  quantities; 

perpendicular directions including iii. determine the resultant of two or 
graphical methods of   more vectors; 

     solution. iv. determine relative velocity;  
 v. resolve vectors into two 
  perpendicular components; 
 vi. use graphical methods to solve 
  vector problems. 
  
  
  
 Candidates should be able to: 

(2b)   Measurement, position, distance and    
 displacement  i. use strings, meter rule and 

(a)  concept of displacement; engineering calipers, vernier 
(ii)   distinction between distance and     calipers and micrometer, screw 
        displacement; guage; 

  (iii)  concept of position and    coordinates; ii. note the degree of accuracy; 
(iv)  frame of reference. 

173 
 



Physics 
 

TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

 iii. identify distance travel in a 
 specified direction; 
 iv. use compass and protractor to 
 locate points/directions; 
 v. use Cartesians systems to locate 
 positions in x-y plane; 
 vi. plot graph and draw inference 
 from the graph. 
  
  

(3.)  Motion  Candidates should be able to; 
  

            (a)  Newton’s laws of motion: i. identify different types of motion; 
(i)    inertia, mass and force;  

     (ii)   relationship between mass and  ii. solve numerical problem on collinear 
             acceleration; motion; 

      (iii)   impulse and momentum; iii. identify force as cause of motion; 
(iv)  force – time graph; iv. identify push and pull as forms of 
(v)   conservation of linear momentum  force; 
        (Coefficient of restitution not  v. identify electric and magnetic 
        necessary). attractions, gravitational pull as 

 forms of field forces; 
(b)Types of motion:  

translational, oscillatory, rotational, spin vi. differentiate between speed, velocity 
and random and acceleration; 
 vii. deduce equations of uniformly 

(c) Relative motion accelerated  motion; 
 viii. solve problems of motion under 

(d) Causes of motion gravity; 
  

(e) Types of force ix. interpret distance-time graph and 
 velocity-time graph; 

           (i) contact x. compute instantaneous velocity and 
             (ii) force field acceleration; 

  
(f) linear motion  

(i)   speed, velocity and acceleration; xi. establish expressions for the range, 
(ii)   equations of uniformly   accelerated maximum height and time of flight of 
        motion; projectiles, rockets, missles; 
(iii)  motion under gravity; xii. solve problems involving projectile 
(iv)  distance-time graph and velocity time motion; 
        graph;  
(v)    instantaneous velocity and  xiii. solve numerical problems involving 
         acceleration. impulse and momentum; 

 

174 
 



Physics 
 

TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

 xiv. interpretation of area under force – 
(g) Projectiles: time graph; 

(i) calculation of range, maximum height xv. interpret Newton’s laws of  motion; 
and time of flight from the ground and a xvi. compare inertia, mass and force; 
height; xvii. deduce the relationship between 

(ii)  applications of projectile motion. mass and acceleration; 
  
  

 xviii. interpret the law of conservation of 
(h) Motion in a circle: linear momentum and application; 

(i)   angular velocity and angular  xix. establish expression for angular 
       acceleration; velocity, angular acceleration and 
(ii)  centripetal and centrifugal forces; centripetal force; 
(iii) applications.  

  
(i) Simple Harmonic Motion (S.H.M): xx.   solve numerical problems involving   

(i)  definition and explanation of simple motion in a circle; 
harmonic motion; xxi. establish the relationship between 

(ii) examples of systems that execute   period and frequency; 
S.H.M; xxii. analyse the energy changes 

(iii) period, frequency and amplitude of occurring during S.H.M; 
S.H.M; xxiii. identify different types of forced 

(iv) velocity and acceleration of S.H.M; vibration; 
(i) simple treatment of energy change in xxiv. enumerate applications of 

S.H.M; resonance.  
(ii) force vibration and resonance (simple  

treatment).  
  
  
4           Gravitational field Candidates should be able to: 

(i)  Newton’s law of universal gravitation; i. identify the expression for gravitational 
(ii)   gravitational potential; force between two bodies; 
(iii)  conservative and non-conservative  ii. apply Newton’s law of universal 
        fields; gravitation; 
(iv)  acceleration due to gravity; iii. give examples of conservative and non- 
(v)   variation of g on the earth’s surface;       conservative fields; 
(vi)  distinction between mass and weight iv. deduce the expression for gravitational     
        escape velocity; field   potentials; 
(vii) parking orbit and weightlessness. v. identify the causes of variation of g on 

 the earth’s surface; 
 vi. differentiate between mass and weight; 
 vii. determine escape velocity. 
 viii. Relate the expression for 
 gravitational force between two 
 bodies  

175 
 



Physics 
 

TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

 ix. Apply Newton’s law of Universal 
 gravitation. 
  
  
  
  
5.      Equilibrium of Forces Candidates should be able to: 
          (a)  equilibrium of particles: i. apply the conditions for the equilibrium 
          (i)   equilibrium of coplanar forces; of coplanar forces to solve problems; 
         (ii)   triangles and polygon of forces; ii. use triangle and polygon laws of forces 

(iii) Lami’s theorem. to solve equilibrium problems; 
  
        (b)  principles of moments  
         (i)  moment of a force; iii. use Lami’s theorem to solve problems; 

(ii) simple treatment and moment of a couple iv. analyse the principle of moment of a   
(torque); force; 

        (iii) applications. v.  determine moment of a force and 
 couple; 
 vi.  describe some applications of moment 

(c) conditions for equilibrium of rigid bodies of a force and couple; 
under the action of parallel and non- vii. apply the conditions for the 
parallel forces equilibrium of rigid bodies to solve 

        (i)  resolution and composition of forces in problems; 
two perpendicular directions;  viii. resolve forces into two perpendicular 

         (ii) resultant and equilibrant.        directions; 
 ix. determine the resultant and equilibrant 
     (d) centre of gravity and stability of 
         (i) stable, unstable and neutral equilibra.        forces; 
 x.  differentiate between stable, unstable 
 and neutral equilibra. 
(6)     Friction  
         (i) static and dynamic friction; Candidates should be able to: 
         (ii) coefficient of limiting friction and its i.    differentiate between static and 

determination; dynamic   
        (iii) advantages and disadvantages of friction       friction; 
        (iv) reduction of friction; ii.   determine the coefficient of limiting   
        (v) qualitative treatment of viscosity and       friction; 

terminal velocity; iii.  compare the advantages and    
       (vi) Stoke’s law.        disadvantages of friction; 
 iv. suggest ways by which friction can be 
 reduced; 
 v. analyse factors that affect viscosity and 
 terminal velocity; 
(7) (a) Work, Energy and Power vi. apply Stoke’s law. 
         (i)   definition of work, energy and power;  

176 
 



Physics 
 

TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

        (ii)   forms of energy; Candidates should be able to: 
(iii)  conservation of energy; i.  differentiate between work, energy and 

        (iv)  qualitative treatment between different  power; 
                forms of energy; ii. compare different forms of energy, 

(v)    interpretation of area under the force- giving examples; 
        distance curve. iii. apply the principle of conservation of 

 energy; 
 iv. examine the transformation between 
 different forms of energy; 
 v. interpret the area under the force –
 distance curve. 
 vi. solve numerical problems in work, 
 energy and     power. 
  
     (b) Energy and society vii. itemize the sources of energy; 

(i) sources of energy; viii. distinguish between renewable and 
(ii) renewable and non-renewable energy e.g., non- renewable energy, examples should 

coal, crude oil sun, wind etc.; be given; 
(iii)    uses of energy; ix. identify methods of energy transition; 
(iv)  energy and development; x. explain the importance of energy in the 
(v)  energy diversification; development of the society; 
(vi)  environmental impact of energy e.g., xi. analyze the effect of energy use to the 

global warming, greenhouse effect and environment; 
spillage; xii.  identify the impact of energy on the 

(vii)  energy crises; environment; 
(viii) conversion of energy; xiii. identify energy sources that are 
(ix) devices used in energy production. friendly or hazardous to the 

 environment; 
      (c)   Dams and energy production xiv. identify energy uses in their immediate 

 environment; 
(i) location of dams xv.   suggests ways of safe energy use 
(ii) energy production  

 xvi. state different forms of energy 
     (d)  nuclear energy conversion. 

  xvii. Photovoltaic cells 
     (e)   solar energy xviii. Work function ( = hf) 

 xix. Planck’s constant 
(i) photoelectric effect  
(ii) solar collector;  

    (iii) solar panel for energy supply.  
         
8.    Simple Machines Candidates should be able to: 
      (i) definition of simple machines; i. identify different types of simple 
     (ii) types of machines; machines; 

  (iii) mechanical advantage, velocity ratio and  

177 
 



Physics 
 

TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

         efficiency of machines. ii. solve problems involving simple 
 machines. 
  

  
9.  Elasticity: Hooke’s law and Young’s modulus; Candidates should be able to: 
     (i) elastic limit, yield point, breaking point,  i.     interpret force-extension curves;  
     (ii) the spring balance as a device for measuring ii. interpret Hooke’s law and Young’s 

force; modulus of a material; 
    (iii.) work done per unit volume in springs and iii   use spring balance to measure force; 

elastic strings; iv. determine the work done in spring and    
 elastic strings. 
  
  
10. Pressure Candidates should be able to: 
     (a)  Atmospheric Pressure i.   recognize the S.I units of pressure (Pa); 
     (i)   definition of atmospheric pressure; ii.  identify pressure measuring 
    (ii)   units of pressure (S.I) units (Pa); instruments; 
    (iii)  measurement of pressure; iii. relate the variation of pressure to 
    (iv)  simple mercury barometer; height; 
            aneroid barometer and manometer; iv. use a barometer as an altimeter; 
   (v)    variation of pressure with height; v. determine the relationship between 
   (vi) the use of barometer as an altimeter. pressure depth and density; 
 vi apply the principle of transmission of   
   (b)  Pressure in liquids pressure in liquids to solve problems; 
   (i)   the relationship between pressure, depth and vii. determine and apply the principle of 

density (P = gh) pressure in liquid. 
   (ii) transmission of pressure in liquids (Pascal’s  

Principle)  
(iii) application  

  
 Candidates should be able to: 
11. Liquids At Rest i. distinguish between density and relative 
 (i)  determination of density of solids   and liquids density of substances; 
 (ii)  definition of relative density ii. determine the upthrust on a body 
 (iii) upthrust on a body immersed in a liquid immersed in a liquid; 
  (iv) Archimedes’ principle and law of floatation iii. apply Archimedes’ principle and law of 

and applications, e.g., ships and hydrometers.      floatation to solve problems. 
        
  
  

12.  Temperature and Its Measurement Candidates should be able to: 
     (i)  concept of temperature i. identify thermometric properties of   
    (ii)  thermometric properties materials that are used for different 
   (iii)  calibration of thermometers thermometers; 
   (iv) temperature scales –Celsius and Kelvin.  ii.   calibrate thermometers; 

178 
 



Physics 
 

TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

   (v)  types of thermometers  
   (vi) conversion from one scale of temperature to iii.  differentiate between temperature 

another scales   e.g.  Celsius, Fahrenheit and 
 Kelvin; 
 iv. compare the types of thermometers; 
 vi. convert from one scale of temperature 
 to another. 

 
13. Quantity of Heat  
 Candidates should be able to: 
       (i)   heat as a form of energy;  
      (ii)  definition of heat capacity and specific heat  i. differentiate between heat capacity and 

capacity of solids and liquids; specific heat capacity; 
(iv) determination of heat capacity and specific ii. determine heat capacity and specific 

heat capacity of substances by simple heat  
methods e.g. method of mixtures and      capacity using simple methods; 
electrical method and Newton’s law of iii. solve numerical problems. 
cooling.  
  

 Candidates should be able to: 
14. Change of State i.  differentiate between latent heat and 
      (i)   latent heat; specific latent heats of fusion and 
     (ii) specific latent heats of fusion and vaporization; 

vaporization; ii. differentiate between melting, 
     (iii)  melting, evaporation and boiling; evaporation and boiling; 
     (iv)  the influence of pressure and of dissolved iii. examine the effects of pressure and of 

substances on boiling and melting points; dissolved substance on boiling and 
   (v)  application in appliances. melting points. 

 iv.   solve numerical problems. 
  
  
  
  
  
15.   Thermal Expansion Candidates should be able to: 
        (a) Solids  
        (i) definition and determination of linear,   i. determine linear and volume 
             volume and area expansivities; expansivities; 
       (ii) effects and applications, e.g., expansion in ii. assess the effects and applications of     
             building strips and railway lines; thermal expansivities; 

  (iii) relationship between different  iii. determine the relationship between 
        expansivities. different expansivities; 

  
      (b)  Liquids iv. determine volume, apparent, and real 
      (i)  volume expansivity;      expansivities of liquids; 

179 
 



Physics 
 

TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

      (ii) real and apparent expansivities; v. analyse the anomalous expansion of 
     (iii) determination of volume expansivity; water. 
     (iv) anomalous expansion of water.  
  
  
  
  
16.  Gas Laws Candidates should be able to: 
       (i)  Boyle’s law (isothermal process) i. interpret the gas laws; 
 ii. use expression of these laws to solve 
       (ii) Charle’s law (isobaric process) numerical problems; 
       (iii) Pressure law (volumetric process) iii. interpret Van der waal equation for one 
  mole of a real gas. 
      (iv)  absolute zero of temperature  
        
      (v)   general gas equation:  

PV  
               (   = constant) 

T  

                     

     (vi)   ideal gas equation  

               e.g., Pv = nRT  

(iv) Van der waal gas  

  

  

  

  

17. Vapours  

       (i) unsaturated and saturated vapours; Candidates should be able to: 

      (ii) relationship between saturated vapour i. distinguish between saturated and 

pressure (S.V.P) and boiling; unsaturated vapours; 

     (iii) determination of S.V.P by barometer tube ii. relate saturated vapour pressure to 

method; boiling point; 

     (iv) formation of dew, mist, fog, cloud and rain; iii. determine S.V.P by barometer tube 

     (v) study of dew point, humidity and relative method; 

humidity; iv. differentiate between dew point, 

     (vi) hygrometry; estimation of the humidity of humidity and relative humidity; 

the atmosphere using wet and dry bulb vi. estimate the humidity of the 

hygrometers. atmosphere using wet and dry bulb 

 hygrometers; 

 vii.   solve numerical problems. 

  

18. Structure of Matter and Kinetic Theory  

      (a)   Molecular nature of matter Candidates should be able to: 

      (i)   atoms and molecules; i. differentiate between atoms and 
molecules; 

180 
 



Physics 
 

TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

 (ii)  molecular theory: explanation of Brownian ii. use molecular theory to explain 
motion, diffusion, surface tension, capillarity, Brownian motion, diffusion, surface, 
adhesion, cohesion and angles of contact e.tc; tension, capillarity, adhesion, cohesion 
law of definite proportion; and angle of contact; 

      (iii) examples and applications. iii. examine the assumptions of kinetic 
 theory; 
     (b)  Kinetic Theory  iv. interpret kinetic theory, the pressure 
      (i)  assumptions of the kinetic theory exerted by gases, Boyle’s law, 
     (ii) using the theory to explain the pressure Charles’s law, melting, boiling, 

exerted by gas, Boyle’s law, Charles’ law, vaporization, change in temperature, 
melting, boiling, vapourization, change in evaporation, etc. 
temperature, evaporation, etc.  

  
  
  
19.  Heat Transfer Candidates should be able to: 
      (i) conduction, convection and radiation as i. differentiate between conduction, 

modes of heat transfer; convection and radiation as modes of 
     (ii)  temperature gradient, thermal conductivity heat transfer; 

and heat flux; ii. solve problems on temperature 
    (iii)  effect of the nature of the surface on the    gradient, thermal conductivity and heat 
            energy radiated and absorbed by it; flux; 
    (iv)  the conductivities of common materials; iii. assess the effect of the nature of the 
    (v)   the thermos flask/vacuum flask; surface on the energy radiated and 
    (vi)  land and sea breeze; absorbed by it; 

 (vii) combustion engines. iv. compare the conductivities of common 
      materials; 
 v. relate the component part of the working 
 of the thermos flask; 
 vi. differentiate between land and sea      
 breeze; 
 vii. analyse the principles of operating 
 internal combustion jet engines, 
 rockets. 
 viii. understand the advantages and 
 disadvantages of electric engine over 
 combustion engine. 
20.    Waves  

        (a)  Production and Propagation Candidates should be able to: 
        (i)  wave motion; i. interpret wave motion; 
        (ii) vibrating systems as source of waves; ii. identify vibrating systems as sources of 
       (iii) waves as mode of energy transfer; waves; 

     (iv) distinction between particle motion and iii use waves as a mode of energy transfer; 
wave motion; iv distinguish between particle motion and 

wave motion; 

181 
 



Physics 
 

TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

   (v)  relationship between frequency, wavelength v. relate frequency and wave length to 
and wave velocity (V=f λ); wave 

     (vi)  phase difference, wave number and wave       velocity; 
vector; vi. determine phase difference, wave    

     (vii) progressive wave equation e.g.   number and wave vector; 
2 vii. use the progressive wave equation to 

          Y = A sin (vt) 
 compute basic wave parameters; 

        viii. examples in wave equations; 

           (b) Classification ix. differentiate between mechanical and 

            (i) types of waves; mechanical and        electromagnetic waves; 

electromagnetic waves; x.   differentiate between longitudinal and 

            (ii) longitudinal and transverse waves;         transverse waves; 

           (iii) stationary and progressive waves;  

           (iv) examples of waves from springs, ropes, xi. distinguish between stationary and 

stretched strings and the ripple tank. progressive waves; 

 xii. indicate the example of waves 

 generated from springs, ropes, 

 stretched strings and the ripple tank; 

      (c) Characteristics/Properties  

           (i)  reflection, refraction, diffraction and  xiii.  differentiate between reflection,    

                 plane polarization;         refraction, diffraction and plane  

           (ii) superposition of waves e.g., interference         polarization of waves; 

(iii)  Beats; xiv. analyse the principle of superposition 

(iv) Doppler effects (qualitative treatment of  

only).        waves; 

 xv. solve numerical problems on waves 

        explain the phenomenon of beat, beat  

        frequency and uses; 

 xvi.  explain Doppler effect of sound and  

        application 

  

  

  

21. Propagation of Sound Waves Candidates should be able to: 

          (i) the necessity for a material medium; i.  determine the need for a material 

         (ii) speed of sound in solids, liquids and air; medium in the propagation of sound 

        (iii) reflection of sound; echoes, reverberation waves; 

and their applications; ii. compare the speed of sound in solids, 

        (iv) advantages and disadvantages of echoes and liquids and air; 

reverberations. iii. relate the effects of temperature and   

 pressure to the speed of sound in air; 

 iv. solve problem on echoes, reverberation 

 and speed; 

 v.   compare the disadvantages and  
      advantages of echoes. 

182 
 



Physics 
 

TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

 vi. solve problems on echo, reverberation 
 and speed of sound. 
  
22. Characteristics of Sound Waves Candidates should be able to: 
       (i) noise and musical notes; i. differentiate between noise and musical 
      (ii) quality, pitch, intensity and loudness and notes; 

their application to musical instruments; ii. analyse quality, pitch, intensity and 
     (iii) simple treatment of harmonics and overtones loudness of sound notes; 

produced by vibrating strings and their iii. evaluate the application of (ii) above in 
columns the construction of musical 

 instruments; 

1 T iv. identify overtones by vibrating stings 
        Fo=  ( = m / )  and air columns; 

2L 
iv. itemize acoustical examples of 

 resonance; 
       (iv) acoustic examples of resonance; vi. determine the frequencies of notes 
       (v)  frequency of a note emitted by air columns emitted by air columns in open and 

in closed and open pipes in relation to their closed pipes in relation to their lengths. 
lengths.  

  
      23. Light Energy Candidates should be able to: 
           (a)  Sources of Light i.  compare the natural and artificial 

           (i)   natural and artificial sources of light; sources of light; 
 (ii)  luminous and non-luminous objects. ii. differentiate between luminous and non 

      luminous objects; 
           (b)  Propagation of light iii. relate the speed, frequency and 

 (i)   speed, frequency and wavelength of light; wavelength of light; 
  (ii)  formation of shadows and eclipse; iv. interpret the formation of shadows and 

             (iii)  the pin-hole camera. eclipses; 
 v. solve problems using the principle of 
 operation of a pin-hole camera. 
  
  
  

24. Reflection of Light at Plane and Curved Candidates should be able to: 
Surfaces i.  interpret the laws of reflection; 

           (i)   laws of reflection; ii. illustrate the formation of images by 
      (ii)  application of reflection of light; plane, concave and convex mirrors; 
      (iii)  formation of images by plane, concave and    iii. apply the mirror formula to solve 
              convex mirrors and ray diagrams; optical 

    (iv)  use of the mirror formula:       problems; 
1 1 1
= +  iv. determine the linear magnification; 

f u v v. apply the laws of reflection of light to 
    the working of periscope, kaleidoscope 

and the sextant. 

183 
 



Physics 
 

TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

           (v)   linear and angular magnification.  
  

  
 25.  Refraction of Light Through at Plane and Candidates should be able to: 

Curved Surfaces i.   interpret the laws of reflection; 
       (i)  laws of refraction; ii. determine the refractive index of glass 
       (ii)   explanation of refraction in terms of  and liquid using Snell’s law; 
              velocity of light in the media; iii. determination of focal length of curved 

   surfaces 
       (iii) definition of refractive index of a medium; iv. determine the refractive index using the 

 (iv) determination of refractive index of glass        principle of real and apparent depth; 
        and liquid using Snell’s law; v. determine the conditions necessary for  
 (v)  real and apparent depth and lateral  total internal reflection; 
        displacement; vi.  examine the use of periscope, prism, 
(vi)  critical angle and total internal reflection. binoculars, optical fibre; 

 vii. apply the principles of total internal 
       (b) Glass Prism reflection to the formation of mirage; 
       (i) use of the minimum deviation formula: viii. use of lens formula and ray diagrams to 
 solve optical numerical problems; 

A+ D ix. determine the magnification of an 
sin   image; 

 2 
    U =                                                         x .   calculate the refractive index of a glass 

A
sin 

 2 
prism using minimum deviation 

 formula; 
                                               xi. ray tracing through optical prism. 
       (ii)  type of lenses; triangular, rectangular etc.  
               
      (iii) use of lens formula:  

1 1 1
        = +  and Newton’s formular (F2  

 = ab) 
f u v  

v  

(v) magnification.  

  

  

  

26.  Optical Instruments  

      (i)  general principles of microscopes, Candidates should be able to: 

telescopes,  i. apply the principles of operation of 

            projectors, cameras and the human eye optical 

            (physiological details of the eye are not        instruments to solve problems; 

            required); ii. distinguish between the human eye and 

 the cameras; 

     (ii)  power of a lens; iii. calculate the power of a lens; 

     (iii) angular magnification; iv.  evaluate the angular magnification of 
optical instruments; 

184 
 



Physics 
 

TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

     (iv) near and far points; v. determine the near and far points;  
     (v)  sight defects and their corrections. vi. detect sight defects and their 

 corrections. 
27. (a) Dispersion of light and colours  
      (i)   dispersion of white light by a triangular    
             Prism; Candidates should be able to: 
      (ii)  production of pure spectrum; i.   identify primary colours and obtain 
      (iii) colour mixing by addition and subtraction;      secondary colours by mixing; 

(iv)  colour of objects and colour filters; ii.  understand the formation of rainbow; 
(v)   rainbow and formation. iii. deduce why objects have colours; 

 iv.  analyse colours using colour filters; 
 v. analyse the electromagnetic 
(b)Electromagnetic spectrum spectrum in relation to their 
        (i) description of sources and uses of various wavelengths, sources, detection 

types of radiation. and uses; 
 vi. define monochromatic light. 
  
28.  Electrostatics  
       (i)  existence of positive and negative charges in Candidates should be able to: 

matter; i.    identify charges; 
       (ii) charging a body by friction, contact and ii.   examine uses of an electroscope; 

induction; iii.  apply Coulomb’s square law of  
      (iii) electroscope;       electrostatics to solve problems; 
      (iv) Coulomb’s inverse square law, electric field iv.  deduce expressions for electric field  

and potential;       intensity and potential difference; 
     (v)  electric field intensity, potential and potential   v.   identify electric field flux patterns of  

difference;       isolated and interacting  charges; 
     (vi) electric discharge and lightning. vi.  analyse the distribution of charges on a 
       conductor and how it is used in 
 lightening conductors’ 
 vii. charge a body by friction, 
 induction and contant. 
  
29.  Capacitors  
      (i)   types and functions of capacitors; Candidates should be able to: 
     (ii)   parallel plate capacitors; i.    determine uses of capacitors; 
     (iii)  capacitance of a capacitor; ii.   analyse parallel plate capacitors; 
     (iv)  the relationship between capacitance, area iii.  determine the capacitance of a  
             separation of plates and medium between        capacitor; 
             the plates iv.  analyse the factors that affect the  
                           capacitance of a capacitor; 

EA v.   solve problems involving the  
                     C =   

d       arrangement of a capacitor; 

  vi. determine the energy stored in  
       capacitors. 

185 
 



Physics 
 

TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

  (v)    capacitors in series and parallel;  
  (vi)   energy stored in a capacitor.  
  
30.  Electric Cells  

 Candidates should be able to: 
    (i)   simple voltaic cell and its defects; i.   identify the defects of the simple voltaic 
    (ii)   Daniel cell, Leclanche cell (wet and dry); cell and their correction; 
    (iii)  lead –acid accumulator and Nickel-Iron ii.   compare different types of cells  

(Nife) Lithium lon and Mercury cadmium;       including solar cell; 
    (iv)  maintenance of cells and batteries (detail iii. compare the advantages of lead-acid 
            treatment of the chemistry of a cell is not and Nikel iron accumulator; 
            required); iv. solve problems involving series and 

(vi) arrangement of cells; parallel combination of cells. 
(vii) efficiency of a cell.  

  
  
31.   Current Electricity  
        (i) electromagnetic force (emf), potential Candidates should be able to: 

difference (p.d.), current, internal resistance i.  differentiate between emf, p.d., current 
of a cell and lost Volt; and internal resistant of a cell; 

        (ii) Ohm’s law, resistivity and conductivity; ii. apply Ohm’s law to solve problems; 
        (iii) measurement of resistance; iii. use metre bridge to calculate resistance; 
        (iv) meter bridge; iv. compute effective total resistance of 
        (v) resistance in series and in parallel and their both parallel and series arrangement of  

combination; resistors; 
       (vi) the potentiometer method of measuring v.  determine the resistivity and the 

emf, current and internal resistance of a cell. conductivity of a conductor; 
(vii) electrical networks. vi. measure emf. current and  internal 

 resistance of a cell using the 
 potentiometer; 
 vii. identify the advantages of the        
 potentiometer; 
 viii. apply Kirchoff’s law in electrical 
 networks. 
  
32.  Electrical Energy and Power  
       (i) concepts of electrical energy and power; Candidates should be able to: 
      (ii) commercial unit of electric energy and i. apply the expressions of electrical 

power; energy and power to solve problems; 
     (iii) electric power transmission ii. analyse how power is transmitted from 

(v) heating effects of    electric current; the power station to the consumer; 
(vi) electrical wiring of houses; iii. identify the heating effects of current  
(vii) use of fuses. and its uses; 

 iv.   identify the advantages of parallel  
        arrangement over series; 

186 
 



Physics 
 

TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

 v.     determine the fuse rating. 
33.  Magnets and Magnetic Fields  
       (i)  natural and artificial magnets; Candidates should be able to: 
       (ii) magnetic properties of soft iron and steel; i.  give examples of natural and artificial 
      (iii) methods of making magnets and magnets; 

demagnetization; ii. differentiate between the magnetic 
      (iv) concept of magnetic field; properties of soft iron and steel; 
      (v)  magnetic field of a permanent magnet; iii. identify the various methods of making 
      (vi) magnetic field round a straight current magnets and demagnetizing magnets; 

carrying conductor, circular wire and iv. describe how to keep a magnet from 
solenoid; losing its magnetism; 

     (vii) properties of the earth’s magnetic field; v. determine the flux pattern of an isolated 
north and south poles, magnetic meridian and magnet; 
angle of dip and declination; vi. determine the flux pattern exhibited 

     (viii) flux and flux density; when two magnets  are placed together 
      (ix)  variation of magnetic field intensity over the pole to pole; 

earth’s surface vii. determine the flux of a current carrying 
(x) applications: earth’s magnetic field in conductor, circular wire and solenoid 

navigation and mineral exploration. including the polarity of the solenoid; 
 viii. determine the flux pattern of a magnet 
 placed in the earth’s magnetic fields; 
 ix. identify the magnetic elements of the 
 earth’s flux; 
 x. determine the variation of earth’s 
 magnetic field on the earth’s surface; 
 xi. examine the applications of the earth’s 
 magnetic field. 
  
  
34.  Force on a Current-Carrying Conductor in a Candidates should be able to: 

Magnetic Field i.  determine the direction of force on a 
        (i)    quantitative treatment of force between current carrying conductor using 

two parallel current-carrying conductors; Fleming’s left-hand rule; 
        (ii)   force on a charge moving in a magnetic  ii.  interpret the attractive and repulsive 
                field; forces between two parallel current-
        (iii)  the d. c. motor; carrying conductors using diagrams; 
        (iv)  electromagnets; iii. determine the relationship between the 
         (v)  carbon microphone; force, magnetic field strength, velocity 
        (vi) moving coil and moving iron instruments; and the angle through which the charge 

(viii) conversion of galvanometers to ammeters    enters the field; 
and voltmeter using shunts and iv.  interpret the working of the d. c. motor; 
multipliers; v.   analyse the principle of electromagnets 

(ix) sensitivity of a galvanometer. and give examples of its application; 
 vi. compare moving iron and moving coil 

       instruments; 

187 
 



Physics 
 

TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

 vii. convert a galvanometer into an 
 ammeter or a voltmeter; 
 viii.  identify the factors affecting the 
 sensitivity of a galvanometer. 
  
  
35. (a) Electromagnetic Induction Candidates should be able to: 
        i. interpret the laws of electromagnetic 
      (i)    Faraday’s laws of electromagnetic  induction; 
              induction; ii. identify factors affecting induced emf; 
      (ii)   Lenz’s law as an illustration of the  iii. recognize how Lenz’s law illustrates 
               principle of conservation of energy; the 
     (iii)   factors affecting induced emf;       principle of conservation of energy; 
     (iv)  a.c. and d.c generators;  
     (v)   transformers; iv. interpret the diagrammatic set up of A. 
     (vi)  the induction coil. C. generators; 
 v.  identify the types of transformer; 
      (b)  Inductance vi. examine principles of operation of 
      (i)  explanation of inductance; transformers; 
      (ii)  unit of inductance; vii. assess the functions of an induction 
      (iii) energy stored in an inductor: coil; 

1
                   E=  I2L viii. draw some conclusions from the 

2 principles of operation of an induction 
 

coil; 
      (iv) application/uses of inductors. 

ix.  interpret the inductance of an inductor; 
 

x. recognize units of inductance; 
 

xi. calculate the effective total inductance 
  (c)   Eddy Current  

in series and parallel arrangement; 
  (i)   reduction of eddy current 

xii. deduce the expression for the energy 
       (ii)  applications of eddy current  

stored in an inductor; 
(iii) effects of eddy current 

xiii. examine the applications of inductors; 
 

xiv. describe the method by which eddy 
 

current losses can be reduced; 
 

xv. determine ways by which eddy 
 

currents can be used. 
 

 
 

 
 

 
36.  Simple A. C. Circuits 

Candidates should be able to: 
       (i) explanation of a.c. current and voltage; 

i.  identify a.c. current and d.c. voltage; 
      (ii) peak and r.m.s. values; 

ii. differentiate between the peak and r.m.s. 
     (iii) a.c. source connected to a resistor; 

values of a.c.; 
     (iv) a.c source connected to a capacitor- 

iii. determine the phase difference between 
capacitive reactance; 

current and voltage; 
iv.  interpret R-L-C circuits; 

188 
 



Physics 
 

TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

     (v)  a.c source connected to an inductor inductive v.  analyse vector diagrams; 
reactance; vi. calculate the effective voltage, 

     (vi) R-L-C circuits; reactance and impedance; 
    (vii) vector diagram, phase angle and power vii. recognize the condition by which the 

factor; circuit is at resonance; 
   (viii) resistance and impedance; viii. determine the resonant frequency of    

(ix)   effective voltage in an R-L-C circuits;    R-L-C arrangement; 
    (x)   resonance and resonance frequency: ix. determine the instantaneous power, 

1 average power and the power factor in 
                   F0 =      

2 LC a. c. circuits. 

  

  

  

  

37. Conduction of Electricity Through Candidates should be able to: 

       (a) liquids i. distinguish between electrolytes and non- 

            electrolytes; 

       (i)    electrolytes and non-electrolyte; ii. analyse the processes of electrolysis; 

       (ii)   concept of electrolysis; iii. apply Faraday’s laws of electrolysis to 

       (iii)  Faraday’s laws of electrolysis; solve problems; 

       (iv)  application of electrolysis, e.g.,  

electroplating, calibration of ammeter etc.  

  

  

       (b) gases iv. analyse discharge through gases; 

        (i) discharge through gases (qualitative v. determine some applications/uses of 

treatment only); conduction of electricity through gases. 

        (ii) application of conduction of electricity  

through gases;  

  

  

  

38. Elementary Modern Physics Candidates should be able to: 

       (i) Bohr’s theory, Rutherford’s theory and    i. identify the models of the atom and write 

radioactivity; their limitations; 

       (ii)   models of the atom and their limitations; ii. describe elementary structure of the 

       (iii)  elementary structure of the atom; atom; 

      (iv)  energy levels and spectra; iii. differentiate between the energy levels 

      (v)  thermionic and photoelectric emissions; and spectra of atoms; 

      (vi)   Einstein’s equation and stopping potential iv. compare thermionic emission and 

      (vii)  applications of thermionic emissions and  photoelectric emission; 

              photoelectric effects; v. apply Einstein’s equation to solve 

      (viii) simple method of production of x-rays; problems of  photoelectric effect; 
vi. calculate the stopping potential; 

189 
 



Physics 
 

TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

     (ix) properties and applications of alpha, beta vii. relate some application of thermionic 
and gamma rays; emission and photoelectric effects; 

      (x) half-life and decay constant; viii. interpret the process involved in the 
     (xi)  simple ideas of production of energy by         production of x-rays; 

fusion and fission; ix  dentify some properties and 
     (xii)  binding energy, mass defect and Einstein’s applications of  x-rays; 

Energy equation   x.     analyse elementary radioactivity; 
 xi.   distinguish between stable and 
              [∆E = ∆Mc2]                unstable 
                nuclei; 
    (xiii)  wave-particle (duality of matter); xii.   identify isotopes of an element;  
   (xiv)  electron diffraction; xiii.  compare the properties of alpha, beta 
   (xv) the uncertainty principle. and gamma rays; 
 xiv. relate half-life and decay constant of a  
        radioactive element; 
 xv. determine the binding energy, mass 
 defect and Einstein’s energy equation; 
 xvi. analyse wave particle duality; 
 xvii. solve some numerical problems based 
 on the uncertainty principle and wave – 
 particle duality. 
  
  
  
39.  Introductory Electronics  
      (i)  distinction between metals, semiconductors Candidates should be able to: 

and insulators (elementary knowledge of band i. differentiate between conductors, semi-    
gap is required);     conductors and insulators; 

     (ii)    intrinsic and extrinsic semiconductors (n- ii. distinguish between intrinsic and 
type and p-type semiconductors);  extrinsic semiconductors; 

     (iii) uses of semiconductors and diodes in iii. distinguish between electron and hole 
rectification and transistors in amplification; carriers; 

     iv. analyse diodes and transistor  
(iv) elementary knowledge of diodes and vi. relate diodes to rectification and 

transistors. transistor to amplification. 
  
  
40.     Introduction to fibre optics and lasers   
          (a) fibre optics Candidates should be able to; 
   (i)  explain the concept of fibre optics; 
   (ii) understand the principle of 
 transmission of light through an 
 optical fibre; 
 
 

190 
 



Physics 
 

TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

  (iii) apply the principle of fibre optics in 
 Local Area Network (LAN), medicine, 

(b) Lasers  laser beam etc; 
  
  

 Candidates should be able to; 
  (i) understand the meaning of laser; 

 (ii) understand the various types of lasers 
(solid state, gas, liquid and semiconductor 
lasers); 
(iii) apply the knowledge of lasers in 
scientific research, communication, 
medicine, military technology, holograms 
etc;  
 (iv) identify the dangers involved in 
using lasers. 

 
 
 

 
RECOMMENDED TEXTS 

 
 
Ike, E.E. (2014). Essential Principles of Physics, Jos ENIC Publishers. 
 
Ike, E.E. (2014). Numerical Problems and Solutions in Physics, Jos: ENIC Publishers. 
 
Nelkon, M. (1977). Fundamentals of Physics, Great Britain: Hart Davis Education. 
 
Nelkon, M. and Parker … (1989). Advanced Level Physics, (Sixth Edition): Heinemann. 
 
Okeke, P.N. and Anyakoha, M.W. (2000). Senior Secondary School Physics, Lagos: Pacific 

Printers. 
 
Olumuyiwa, A. and Ogunkoya, O. O. (1992). Comprehensive Certificate Physics, Ibadan: 

University Press Plc. 
Orokpo, J.A. (2025). Ultimate UTME Preparatory Series Physics. Peridot Publishers and Printing 

Services Limited, Nasarawa State, Nigeria 
 
 

191


Principles of Accounting 
 

PRINCIPLES OF ACCOUNTING 
 

GENERAL OBJECTIVES 
 
The aim of the Unified Tertiary Matriculation Examination (UTME) syllabus in Principles of 
Accounting is to prepare the candidates for the Board’s examination.  It is designed to test their 
achievement of the course objectives, which are to: 

1. Stimulate and sustain their interest in Principles of Accounting; 
2. Use basic principles, knowledge, practical skills in Financial Accounting; 
3. Apply the knowledge and interpretation of Accounting information to decision making; 
4. Appreciate the relevance of Accounting information to business and governments; and 
5. Apply information technology in solving Accounting problems. 

 
DETAILED SYLLABUS 

 
TOPICS/CONTENTS OBJECTIVES 

  
1. Nature and Significance of Book keeping Candidates should be able to: 

and Accounting  
a. Development of Accounting (including i. differentiate between Book Keeping and Accounting; 

branches of accounting) ii. understand the historical background of Book Keeping 
b. Objectives of Book Keeping and and Accounting; 

accounting iii. apply the right principles, concepts and conventions to 
c. Users and characteristics of Accounting solving Accounting problems; 

information iv. understand the role of Accounting information in 
d. Principles, concepts and conventions of decision making; 

Accounting (nature, significance and v. identify the types/branches of Accounting such as Cost 
application) Accounting, Management Accounting, Auditing, 

e. Role of Accounting records and Financial Accounting, Forensic Accounting, Social and 
information Environmental Accounting, Government Accounting 

f. Career opportunities in Book Keeping and and Taxation; and 
Accounting vi. identify the different career opportunities in Book 

 Keeping and Accounting. 
  

2. Principles of Double Entry Candidates should be able to: 
  

a.   Source documents i. identify various source documents and their uses; 
b.   Books of original entry ii. relate source documents to the various books of original 
c.   Accounting equation entry; 
d.   Ledger and its classifications iii. determine the effect of changes in elements of 
e.   Trial balance Accounting equation; 
f.   Types and correction of errors    iv. understand the role of double entry principles in treating 
g. Suspense Account financial transactions; 
 v. extract a trial balance from ledger accounts; 

 vi. identify various types of errors and their corrections; 
 and 
 vii. correct errors using suspense account. 
  
  

192 
 



Principles of Accounting 
 

TOPICS/CONTENTS OBJECTIVES 

  
3. Ethics, Professional and Regulatory Bodies Candidates should be able to: 

in Accounting  
 i. understand the ethics required in preparing and 
a. Objectives presenting Accounting information;  
b. Qualities of an Accountant ii. understand qualities of an Accountant such as honesty, 
c. Accounting professional bodies in integrity, transparency, accountability and fairness; 

Nigeria iii. understand the purpose and functions of Accounting 
d. Accounting regulatory bodies professional bodies in Nigeria; and 

 iv. understand the purpose and functions of Accounting 
 regulatory bodies in Nigeria e.g. Financial Reporting 
 Council of Nigeria (FRCN), Corporate Affairs 
 Commission (CAC) and International Accounting 
 Standard Board (IASB). 
  
  

4.  Cash Book  Candidates should be able to: 
  

a. Columnar Cash Books: i.     determine the cash float; 
i.   single column ii.    differentiate between two and three columnar  
ii.  double column        cash books and how transactions are recorded in  
iii. three column        them; 
  

b. Discounts iii.  differentiate between trade and cash discounts; 
c. Petty Cash Book and imprest system iv.  examine the effects of trade and cash discounts in  

       the books of accounts; and 
 v.   identify various petty cash expenses. 
  
  

5. Bank Transactions and Reconciliation Candidates should be able to: 
Statements  

 i. identify various instruments of bank transactions such 
a. Instrument of bank transactions  as cheques, pay-in-slips, credit cards, debit cards, 
b. e-banking system internet banking and their uses; 
c. Causes of discrepancies between cash ii. assess the impact of automated credit system, credit 

book and bank statement transfers, interbank transfers and direct debit on cash 
d. Bank reconciliation statement balances; 
e. Adjusted cash book iii. identify factors that cause discrepancies between cash 

 book balance and bank statement; and 
 iv. determine adjusted cash book balance. 
  
  

6. Final Accounts of a Sole Candidates should be able to: 
Trader/Proprietor  

 i. determine the cost of sales, gross profit and net profit of 
a. Statement of profit or loss/income a sole trader; 

statement ii. identify non-current assets, current assets, long- term 
b. Statement of financial position  liabilities, current liabilities and proprietor’s capital; 
c. Adjustments: iii. compute adjustable items on the related expenditure and 
i. provision for bad and doubtful debt income in the statement of profit or loss; and 
ii. provision for discounts iv. differentiate between bad debts and provision for bad 
iii. provision for depreciation using straight- and doubtful debts. 

line and reducing balance methods  
iv. accruals and prepayment 

193 
 



Principles of Accounting 
 

TOPICS/CONTENTS OBJECTIVES 

  
  

7. Stock Valuation Candidates should be able to: 
  

a. Meaning and purpose of stock valuation i. determine the value of materials issued to production 
b. Methods of stock valuation e.g., FIFO, department using FIFO, LIFO and simple average; 

LIFO and simple average ii. calculate the closing stock of materials or finished 
c. Advantages and disadvantages of the goods using FIFO, LIFO and simple average; 

methods iii. compare the advantages and disadvantages of each 
 method of stock valuation; and 
 iv. determine the effects of stock valuation on elements of 
 income statement. 
  
  

8. Control Accounts  Candidates should be able to: 
  
a. Meaning and uses of control accounts i. understand the meaning of control accounts; 
b. Purchases ledger control account ii. identify the uses of control accounts in a business 
c. Sales ledger control account enterprise; 

 iii. differentiate between sales ledger control account and 
 purchases ledger control account; and 
 iv. identify the entries in control accounts. 
  
  

9. Incomplete Records and Single Entry Candidates should be able to: 
  
a. Meaning of incomplete records and i. understand and differentiate between incomplete 

single entry records and single entry; 
b. Differentiate between incomplete ii. determine proprietor’s capital using statement of 

records and single entry affairs; 
c. Determination of missing figures iii. determine the amount of sales, purchases, cash 
d. Preparation of final accounts from balances, debtors, creditors and expenses by 

incomplete records converting single entry to double entry; and 
e. Conversion of single entry to double iv. use accounting equations, gross and net profit 

entry percentages to determine cost of sales, gross and net 
 profits. 
  

10. Manufacturing Accounts Candidates should be able to: 
  
a. Purpose of manufacturing account i. identify the reason for preparing manufacturing 
b. Cost classification account; 
c. Cost apportionment ii. calculate prime cost, overhead cost, production cost 
d. Preparation of manufacturing account and total cost; and 

 iii. determine the basis of cost apportionment among 
 production, administration, selling and distribution. 
  

11. Accounts of Not-For-Profit-Making Candidates should be able to: 
Organizations  
 i. distinguish between profit oriented and Not-For-Profit-

a. Objectives  Making Organizations; 
b. Receipts and payments account ii. determine annual subscription, subscription in arrears 
c. Income and expenditure account and in advance; and 
d. Statement of financial position  iii. compute the cash balances, accumulated funds, surplus 

 or deficit for the period. 

194 
 



Principles of Accounting 
 

TOPICS/CONTENTS OBJECTIVES 

  
  

12. Departmental Accounts Candidates should be able to: 
  

a. Objectives i. identify the reasons for preparing departmental 
b. Apportionment of incomes and expenses accounts; 
c. Departmental statement of profit or loss  ii. determine the expenses and incomes attributable to 
d. Inter-departmental transfer departments; 

 iii. compute departmental profit or loss; and 
 iv. understand the Accounting treatment of inter-
 departmental transfer. 
  

13. Branch Accounts Candidates should be able to: 
  
a. Objectives i. understand the reasons for preparing branch accounts; 
b. Types of branches  ii. differentiate between types of branches; 
c. Pricing methods and accounts iii. calculate profit or loss from branches; and 

maintained by head office iv. reconcile the difference between branch and head office 
d. Account maintained by a branch accounts. 
e. Reconciliation of branch and head  

office books  
  
  

14. Joint Venture Accounts Candidates should be able to: 
  

a. Objectives and features  i. identify the objectives and features of joint venture; 
b. Forms of joint ventures  ii. identify the forms of joint venture; 
c. Accounting procedures iii. identify the Accounting procedures of joint venture; and 
d. Memorandum joint venture accounts iv. determine the profit or loss of joint venture. 

  
  

15.      Partnership Accounts Candidates should be able to: 
   

a. Formation of partnership i.   understand the procedures for the formation of 
b. Partners current and capital accounts partnership; 
c. Partnership final accounts: ii. identify the accounts maintained for partnership 

i. profit or loss account business; 
ii. appropriation account iii. determine the effects of admission and retirement of a 

iii. statement of financial position partner; 
d. Treatment of goodwill iv. determine profit or loss on revaluation of assets; and 
e. Admission/retirement of a partner v. determine the partners’ share of profit or loss on 
f. Dissolution of partnership dissolution. 

  
  

16. Introduction to Company Accounts Candidates should be able to: 
  
a. Formation and classification of i. differentiate between types of companies; 

companies ii. identify the procedures of treating the issue of shares 
b. Issue of shares and debentures and debentures; 
c. Final accounts of companies: iii. compute the elements of final accounts of companies; 

i. statement of profit or loss and 
ii. statement of financial position  iv. compute and interpret Accounting ratios such as 

d. Accounting ratios current, acid test and stock turnover. 
 

195 
 



Principles of Accounting 
 

TOPICS/CONTENTS OBJECTIVES 

e. Distinction between capital and  
revenue reserves  

  
  

17. Public Sector Accounting Candidates should be able to: 
  
a. Accounting basis in public sector i. differentiate between public and private sector     
b. Sources of government revenue       accounting; 
c. Capital and recurrent expenditure ii. identify the sources of government revenue; 
d. Consolidated Revenue Fund iii. differentiate between capital and recurrent expenditure; 
e. Statement of assets and liabilities iv. calculate consolidated revenue fund and determine the 
f. Responsibilities and powers of: values of assets and liabilities; 

i. The Accountant General v. identify the duties of the Accountant General, Auditor 
ii. The Auditor General General, Minister of Finance and Treasurer of Local 

iii. The Minister of Finance Government; 
iv. The Treasurer of Local vi. distinguish between elements of control in government 

Government accounting procedures e.g. warrant, votes, budget and 
g. Instruments of financial regulation due process certificate; and 
h. Current issues in public sector vii. understand current trends in public sector Accounting. 

Accounting:  
i. Treasury Single Account (TSA)  

ii. International Public Sector  
Accounting Standard (IPSAS)  

iii. Integrated Payroll and  
Personnel Information System  
(IPPIS)  

  
  

18. Information Technology in Accounting Candidates should be able to: 
  

a. Manual and computerized i. differentiate between manual and computerized 
Accounting processing system Accounting processing system; 

b. Procedures involved in data ii. identify the procedures involved in data processing; 
processing iii. identify the digital technologies use in Accounting 

c. Digitization and digital technologies processing system; 
in Accounting:  iv. understand the benefits of block chain technology in 

i. machine learning and Accounting system; 
artificial intelligence (AI) v. identify the services provided by virtual accountants 

ii. data analytics  such as book keeping, payroll processing, tax 
iii. mobile accounting  preparation, banks, credit and loan accounts 
iv. special accounting software reconciliation, financial statement preparation etc.; 

 and  
d. Block chain technology in vi. identify the advantages and disadvantages of 

Accounting system  computerized Accounting   processing system. 
e. Virtual Accounting   

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

196 
 



Principles of Accounting 
 

 

RECOMMENDED TEXTS 

Adekunle, K.O. (2014). Bounty Financial Accounting for Schools and College, Ibadan: Bounty Press Ltd. 

Agbasiere, E.A., Ufot C.I and Olugbenga T.E. (2015). New age Financial Accounting SSS Text Books, Anambra:  

New Age Press Ltd. 

Ayodele A. (2015). Financial Accounting for Schools and Colleges, Ibadan: Spectrum Books Ltd. 

Ekwue K. C. (2010). Principles of Accounts, Book 1 & 2, Onitsha: Adson Publishing Company,  

Femi L. (2013). Simplified and Amplified Financial Accounting. 

Frankwood and Alan S. (2002). Frankwood’s Business Accounting, Prentice Hall International Edition. 

Hassan M. M. (2001). Government Accounting, Lagos: Malthouse Press Limited. 

Ibrahim, R.A and Kazeem R. A (2018). Essential Financial Accounting for Senior Secondary Schools (sixth edition),          

Ogun State: Tonad Publishers Limited. 

Igben, R. O. (2004). Financial Accounting Made Simple (Vol. I) Lagos: Roi Publishers. 

ICAN (2021). Foundation Level Financial Accounting Study Text, Lagos: Institute of Chartered Accountants of  

Nigeria. 

Ono, D.I., Oshunnira, M. and Ozurigbo, P.M. (2015). Financial Accounting for Senior Secondary Schools, Ibadan:  

Hebn Publishers Plc. 

 

197

Biology 
 

                                                             

BIOLOGY 
 

GENERAL OBJECTIVES 
 
The aim of the Unified Tertiary Matriculation Examination (UTME) syllabus in Biology is to prepare 
the candidates for the Board’s examination. It is designed to test their achievement of the course 
objectives, which are to: 
 
1. demonstrate sufficient knowledge of the concepts of the diversity, interdependence and unity of life; 
2.  account for continuity of life through reorganization, inheritance and evolution; 
3. apply biological principles and concepts to everyday life, especially to matters affecting living 

things, individual, society, the environment, community health and the economy. 
 

DETAILED SYLLABUS 
 

A: VARIETY OF ORGANISMS 
 

TOPICS / CONTENTS / NOTES OBJECTIVES 

  
1.  Living organisms: Candidates should be able to: 
      a.  Characteristics i.   differentiate between the characteristics of   living and non-living 
 things. 

 b.  Cell structure and functions of cell components ii.   identify the structures of plant and animal cells.  
  
 iii.  analyse the functions of the components of plant and animal 

  cells. 
c.  Level of organization   
     i.  Cell e.g. euglena and paramecium,  iv.   compare and contrast the structure of plant and animal cells. 
  
    ii.  Tissue e.g. epithelial tissues and hydra  v. trace the levels of organization among organisms in their 
    logical sequence in relation to the five levels of organization 
   iii.  Organ e.g. onion bulb of living organisms. 
  

          iv.  Systems e.g. reproductive, digestive and  
excretory  

        
      v.  Organisms e.g. Chlamydomonas  

  
  
2.   Evolution among the following: Candidates should be able to: 
  
      a.  Monera (prokaryotes), e.g. bacteria and  i.   analyse external features and characteristics of the listed 
           blue green algae. organisms. 
  

b.  Protista (protozoans and protophyta),  ii. apply the knowledge from (i) above to demonstrate increase in 
     e.g. Amoeba, Euglena and Paramecium. structural complexity. 
  
c.  Fungi, e.g. mushroom and Rhizopus. iii.  trace the stages in the life histories of the listed organisms. 
  

  
d. Plantae (plants) iv.  apply the knowledge of the life histories to demonstrate gradual 
  transition from life in water  to life on land. 
i.  Thallophyta (e.g. Spirogyra).  
 v.      trace the evolution of the listed plants. 
ii.   Bryophyta (mosses and liveworts) e.g.  
      Brachmenium and Merchantia.  

28 
 



Biology 
 

                                                             

  
iii.   Pteridophyta (ferns) e.g. Dryopteris.  
  
iv.  Spermatophyta (Gymnospermae and  

Angiospermae)  
             - Gymnosperms e.g. Cycads and conifers.  

      -  Angiosperms (monocots, e.g. maize;  dicots,  
e.g.    water leaf)  

v.   Plants classified on the span of their life cycles.  
  
e. Animalia (animals) Candidates should be able to: 

i.  Invertebrates  
    -  coelenterate e.g. Hydra i.   trace the advancement of the invertebrate animals. 
    -  Platyhelminthes flatworms e.g. Taenia ii.  determine the economic importance of the  

 -  Nematoda (roundworms)      insects studied. 
 -  Annelida e.g. earthworm iii. assess their values to the environment. 
 -  Arthropoda e.g. mosquito, cockroach, iv. classify plants into animals, biennials and perennials 

housefly, bee, butterfly  
  

- Mollusca e.g. snails  
  
        ii.    Multicellular animals (vertebrates)   v.  trace the advancement of multi-cellular animals. 

- pisces (cartilaginous and bony fish)  
- Amphibia e.g. toads and frogs   vi. determine their economic importance. 
- Reptilia e.g. lizards, snakes and turtles  
- Aves (birds)  
- Mammalia (mammals)  
  
3.   Structural/functional and behavioural Candidates should be able to: 

adaptations of organisms:  
 i. describe how the various structures, functions and behaviour  
    adapt these organisms to their environment, and way of life. 
  
a.    adaptive colouration and its functions ii. Categorize countershading in fish, toads, snakes and warning 
 colouration in mushrooms. 
  
 iii. Differentiate various castes in social insects like termites and 
b.    Behavioural adaptations in social animals their functions in their colony hive. 
 iv. Account for basking in lizards, territorial behavour of other 
 animals under unfavourable conditions (hibernation and 
 aestivation). 
  
  
  
c.   Structural adaptations in organisms account for adaptation in organisms with respect to the following: 

  
 - Obtaining food (beaks and legs of birds, mouthparts of 
 insects, especially mosquito, butterfly and moth.) 
 - Protection and defence (stick insects, praying mantis 
 and toad). 
 - Securing mates (redhead male and female Agama 
 lizards, display of feathers by birds). 
 - Regulating body temperature (skin, feathers and hairs) 
 - Conserving water (spines in plants and scales in 
 mammals). 
  
  
  
  

29 
 



Biology 
 

                                                             

  
B: FORM AND FUNCTIONS  
                                      
              TOPICS / CONTENTS / NOTES                                
 OBJECTIVES 
  
1.  Internal structure of a flowering plant Candidates should be able to: 
       
     i.  Root i.  identify the transverse sections of these  
     ii.  Stem           organs. 
   iii.  Leaf ii.    relate the structure of these organs to their  

           functions. 
 iii. identify supporting tissues in plants (collenchyma) 
 sclerenchyma, xylem and phloem fibres) 
 iv. describe the distribution of supporting tissues in roots, stem 
 and leaf 

b. Internal structure of a mammal     v.    examine the arrangement of the mammalian internal organs. 
    vi.    describe the appearance and position of the digestive,    
            reproductive and excretory organs. 
  
  
  
2. Nutrition Candidates should be able to: 
  
a.   Modes of nutrition i.    compare autotrophic and heterotrophic modes of nutrition. 

i.  Autotrophic      ii.   provide examples from both flowering and non- flowering   
       ii.  Heterotrophic             plants. 
      iii.  compare the photosynthetic and chemosynthetic modes of   
  nutrition; 
 iv.  differentiate the following examples of heterotrophic feeding: 
   b.  Types of Nutrition - holozoic (sheep and man) 

 - Parasitic (roundworm, tapeworm and Loranthus) 
 - saprophytic (Rhizopus and mushroom) 
 - carnivorous plants (sundew and bladderwort) 
 - determine their nutritional value. 
 v.    differentiate the light and dark reactions, of photosynthesis. 
 vi.   determine the necessity of light, carbon (IV) oxide and   
        chlorophyll in photosynthesis. 
 vii.  detect the presence of starch in a leaf as evidence of   

c.  Plant nutrition         photosynthesis. 
  i.   Photosynthesis viii.  identify macro-and micro-elements required by plants. 
  ii.  Chemosynthesis ix.    recognise the deficiency symptoms of nitrogen, phosphorous   
iii. Mineral requirements   and potassium. 

         (macro and micro-nutrients)  x.    indicate the sources of the various classes of food; 
 xi.    determine the nutritional value of food 
 xii.   relate the importance and deficiency (e.g., scurvy, rickets,    

d.  Animal nutrition         kwashiorkor etc.) of each class of food; 
       i.  Classes of food substances; carbohydrates, proteins,   x iii.  determine the importance of a balanced diet. 

fats and oils, vitamins, mineral salts and water  
      xiv.   detect the presence of a food type from the result of a given   
       ii.  Food tests (e.g. starch, reducing sugar, protein, oil,          experiment. 

fat etc.) xv.    describe the structure of a typical mammalian tooth 
 xvi.   differentiate the types of mammalian tooth and relate their     

 iii. The mammalian tooth (structures, types and          structures to their functions. 
functions) xvii.  compare the dental formulae of man, sheep and dog.  

 xviii. relate the structure of the various components of the  
iv.   Mammalian alimentary canal          alimentary canal and its accessory organs (liver, pancreas and    
          gall bladder) to their functions. 
  

30 
 



Biology 
 

                                                             

 v.   Nutrition process (ingestion, digestion, absorption,  xix.  identify the general characteristics of digestive enzymes 
     and assimilation of digested food).  xx.  associate enzymes with digestion of carbohydrates, proteins  
         and fats and 
 xxi. determine the end products of these classes of food. 

  
  
 Candidates should be able to: 

3. Transport i.      determine the relationship between increase in size   and    
   a.   Need for transportation         complexity; and the need for the development of a transport   

         system in plants and animals.  
 ii.     determine the sources of materials and the forms in which  
         they are transported. 
b. Materials for transportation iii.    describe the general circulatory system 

(Excretory products, gases, manufactured food, iv.    compare specific functions of the hepatic portal vein, the  
digested food, nutrient, water and hormones)         pulmonary vein and artery, aorta, the renal artery and vein. 
 v.     identify the organs of the plant vascular system. 
 vi.    understand the specific functions of the phloem and xylem. 
  
 vii.    identify media of transportation (e.g., cytoplasm, 

c. Channels for transportation           cell sap, body fluid, blood and lymph) 
 viii.  state the composition and functions of blood and lymph 
i.      Mammalian circulatory system (heart, arteries,  ix. describe diffusion, osmosis, plasmolysis and  
        vein and capillaries)           turgidity as mechanisms of transportation in organisms. 

 x.      compare the various mechanisms of open  
          circulatory systems in animal, transpiration pull, root  
ii       Plant vascular system (phloem and xylem)          pressure and active transport as mechanisms of   
          transportation in plants. 
  
  

d. Media and processes of mechanism for transportation.  
  
  
  
 Candidates should be able to: 
4.  Respiration  i.       explain the significance of respiration; 
 ii.      describe a simplified outline of the chemical processes     
a.  Respiratory organs and surfaces          involved in glycolysis and Krebs cycle with reference to   
          ATP production 
 iii      deduce gaseous exchange and   
          products, exchange and production of heat energy during   
           respiration from experimental set up. 
b.  The mechanism of gaseous exchange in:  
 iv.      describe the following respiratory organs and surfaces with   

i. Plants           organisms in which they occur; body surface, gill, trachea,    
ii. Animals           lungs, stomata and lenticel. 

  
 v.        describe the mechanism for the opening and closing of the       

c.    Aerobic respiration            stomata 
 vi.       determine respiratory mechanisms in plants and animals. 
 vii.      examine the role of oxygen in the liberation of  
            energy for the activities of the living organisms 
 viii.     explain the effect of insufficient supply of oxygen to the   
             muscles. 
 ix.        use yeast cells and sugar solution to demonstrate 
d. Anaerobic respiration             the process of fermentation. 

 x.         state the economic importance of yeasts. 
  
  
  

31 
 



Biology 
 

                                                             

 Candidates should be able to: 
5. Excretion i.          define the meaning and state the significance of excretion 

a.  Types of excretory structures: ii.         relate the characteristics of each structure with functions. 
      contractile vacuole, flame cell,    iii.        relate the structure of the kidneys to the excretory 
      nephridium, Malpighian tubule, kidney,              and osmo-regulatory functions. 
      stoma and lenticel. iv.        identify the functions and excretory products of  
              the lungs and the skin. 
b. Excretory mechanisms: v.          deduce the economic importance of the excretory 
i.     Kidneys              products of plants e.g., carbon (IV) oxide, oxygen, tannins,   
ii.    lungs          resins, gums, mucilage, alkaloids etc. 
iii.   skin  

  
  
c.  Excretory products of plants  
  
  
  
 Candidates should be able to: 
6. Support and movement  i.         determine the need for support and movement in  
            organisms 
a. Tropic, tactic, nastic and sleep  ii.        identify supporting tissues in plants (collenchyma, 
     movements in plants            sclerenchyma, xylem and phloem fibres) 
 iii.       describe the distribution of supporting tissues in  
            root, stem and leaf. 
 iv.       relate the response of plants to the stimuli of light,  
            water, gravity and touch 
b. supporting tissues in animals v.        identify the regions of growth in roots and shoots  
            and the roles of auxins in tropism. 
 vi.       relate the location of chitin, cartilage and bone to  
            their supporting function. 
c.  Types and functions of the skeleton vii.      relate the structure and the general layout of the  
      i.  Exoskeleton            mammalian skeleton to their supportive, locomotive and     
     ii.   Endoskeleton            respiratory function. 

iii.  Functions of the skeleton in animals viii.     differentiate types of joints using appropriate  
            examples. 
 ix.       apply the protective, supportive, locomotive and  
             respiratory functions of the skeleton to the wellbeing of the            
             animal. 
  
  
  
  
  

 Candidates should be able to: 
7. Reproduction   
 i.         differentiate between asexual and sexual reproduction  
a.     Asexual reproduction ii.        apply natural vegetative propagation in crop production and     
         i.  Fission (e.g., Paramecium)            multiplication. 
        ii.  Budding (e.g., yeast) iii.       apply grafting, budding and layering in agricultural practices. 

  iii. Natural vegetative propagation iv.       relate parts of flower to their functions and reproductive   
  iv. Artificial vegetative propagation            process. 

 v.        state the advantages of cross pollination. 
b. Sexual reproduction in flowering plants vi.       deduce the different types of placentation that develop into   

i.    Floral parts and their functions            simple, aggregate, multiple and succulent fruits. 
ii.   Pollination and fertilization vii.      differentiate between male and female reproductive organs. 

        iii.   products of sexual reproduction viii.     relate their structure and function to the production of   
            offspring. 
 ix.       describe the fusion of gametes as a process of  
c. Reproduction in mammals            fertilization. 

32 
 



Biology 
 

                                                             

i.   Structures and functions of the male and female x.        relate the effects of the mother’s health, nutrition 
reproductive organs            and indiscriminate use of drugs on the    developmental      

       stages of the embryo up to birth. 
ii.  Fertilization and development. xi.       explain the modern methods of regulating reproduction on   

(Fusion of gametes)            e.g., invitro fertilization and birth control 
  
  
  
  
  
8. Growth  Candidates should be able to: 
a.     Meaning of growth i.         apply the knowledge of the conditions necessary for       
       germination on plant growth. 
b. Germination of seeds and condition  ii.        differentiate between epigeal and hypogeal   germination. 

necessary for germination of seeds.  
  
  
9. Co-ordination and control Candidates should be able to: 
a.      Nervous coordination: i.         apply the knowledge of the structure and function of the      

 i.  the components, structure and functions            central nervous system in the coordination of body     
     of the central nervous system            functions in organisms. 
ii.  The components and functions of the  ii.        illustrate reflex actions such as blinking of the eyes, knee     
      peripheral nervous system            jerk etc. 
iii.  Mechanism of transmission of impulses iii.      differentiate between reflex and voluntary actions as well as     
iv.  Reflex action            conditioned reflexes such as salivation, riding a bicycle and     
            swimming. 

 iv.       relate the listed sense organs with their functions. 
b. The sense organs v.        apply the knowledge of the structure and functions of these    
         i.    Skin (tactile)            sense organs in detecting and correcting their defects. 

ii.   Nose (olfactory) vi.       state the location of the listed endocrine glands in animals. 
iii.  Tongue (taste) vii.      relate the hormone produced by each of these glands to their   

   iv.  Eye (sight)             functions. 
         v.  Ear (auditory) viii.     examine the effects of various phytohormones (e.g., auxins,   
            gibberellin, cytokinin, and ethylene) on growth, tropism,     
c.    Hormonal control            flowering, fruit ripening and leaf abscission. 
    i.  animal hormonal system (Pituitary, thyroid,   
         parathyroid, adrenal gland, pancreas, gonads) ix.       relate the function of hormones in homeostasis. 
    ii.  Plant hormones (phytohormones)  
 
d.  Homeostasis  
      i.  Body temperature regulation 
      ii.  Salt and water regulation 
 

 

 

C: ECOLOGY 

TOPICS / CONTENTS / NOTES OBJECTIVES 

1.  Factors affecting the distribution of  Candidates should be able to: 
     Organisms i.           relate the effects of temperature; rainfall, relative  
              humidity, wind speed and direction, altitude, salinity,       
      i.  Abiotic              turbidity, pH and edaphic (soil) conditions on the    
              distribution of organisms. 
 ii.          use appropriate equipment ( secchi disc,  
              thermometer, rain gauge) to measure abiotic     

33 
 



Biology 
 

                                                             

              factors. 
 iii.         describe how the activities of  plants/animals    

ii.   Biotic              (particularly human) affect the distribution  of     
               organisms. 
  
  
  
  
2. Symbiotic interactions of plants  Candidates should be able to: 

and animals  i.            determine appropriate examples of  symbiosis,      
          parasitism, saprophytism, commensalism, mutualism,    
               amensalism, competition, predation and  cooperation    
               among organisms. 
 ii.           explain the distribution of organisms with food chains  

          and food webs in particular habitats. 
(a)  Energy flow in the ecosystem: food chains, iii.          define chains and webs  

food webs and trophic levels. iv.          describe the carbon cycle and its significance including   
(b) Nutrient cycling in nature.               the balance of atmospheric   oxygen and carbon (IV)     
               oxide and global warming. 
    i.  carbon cycle v.           assess the effects of water cycle on other nutrient cycles. 

 vi.          relate the roles of bacteria and leguminous plants in the   
               cycling of nitrogen. 
  
  

         ii.   water cycle  
  
  

                iii.    Nitrogen cycle  
  

  
  
3. Natural Habitats Candidates should be able to: 
 i.            associate plants and animals with each of these   

(a) Aquatic (e.g., ponds, streams, lakes,                habitats. 
                seashores and mangrove swamps) ii.           relate adaptive features to the habitats in which 
 organisms live. 

(b) Terrestrial/arboreal (e.g., tree-tops, abandoned  
farmland or a dry grassy (savanna) field, and  
burrow or hole.  

  
  
4. Local (Nigerian) Biomes Candidates should be able to: 
 i.            locate biomes in regions 
          a.   Tropical rainforest  ii.           apply the knowledge of the features of the listed local              
           b.   Guinea savanna (southern and northern)              biomes in determining the characteristics of  different   
                          regions of Nigeria. 
           c.   Sudan Savanna  
           d.  Desert  
           e.  Highlands of montane forests and grasslands of    
               the Obudu -, Jos -,  Mambilla - Plateaus.  
  
5. The Ecology of Populations Candidates should be able to: 

(a)  Population density and overcrowding. i.            determine the reasons for rapid changes in human  
               population and the consequences of overcrowding. 
 ii.           compute/calculate density as the number of    

(b) Adaptation for survival               organisms per unit area. 
i. Factors that bring about competition iii.          Relate increase in population, diseases, shortage of   

                food and space with intra- and inter-specific    
                competition. 

34 
 



Biology 
 

                                                             

ii. Intra and inter-specific competition iv.          Determine niche differentiation as a means of      
                reducing intra-specific completion. 
 v.            Relate competition to succession. 
 vi.           deduce the effect of these factors on the size of  

iii. Relationship between competition and                 population. 
succession.  

 vii.           determine the interactions between biotic and abiotic     
(c) Factors affecting population sizes:                 factors, (e.g. drought or scarcity of water which 

i.  Biotic (food, pest, disease, predation, leads    
competition and reproductive ability).                 to food shortage and lack of space which causes    

                 increase in disease rates). 
ii. Abiotic (temperature, space, light, rainfall, viii.          trace the sequence in succession to the climax stage   

topography, pressure, pH) etc.                 of stability in plant population. 
  

(d) Ecological succession  
i.   primary succession  
ii.  secondary succession  
  
  

  
6. SOIL Candidates should be able to: 
 i.              identify physical properties of different soil types   

a.    Characteristics of different types                  based on simple measurement of particle size,    
                        of soil (sandy, loamy, clayey)                  porosity or water retention ability. 

             i. soil structure ii.             determine the amounts of air, water, humus and   
                    ii. porosity, capillarity and humus                  capillarity in different soil types experimentally. 
                         content iii.            relate soil characteristics, types and components to   
                 the healthy growth of plants 
             b. Components of the soil  iv.            relate such factors as loss of inorganic matter,  
                    i.   inorganic                 compaction, leaching, erosion of the top soil and    
                    ii.  organic                 repeated cropping with one variety. 
                    iii. soil organisms v.             apply the knowledge of the practice of contour    

iv. soil air                 ridging, terracing, mulching, poly-cropping, strip-     
v.   soil water                 cropping, use of organic and inorganic fertilizers,  

                 crop rotation, shifting cultivation, etc. to enhance    
                soil conservation. 

              c.  Soil fertility 
 

                    i.  loss of soil fertility 
 

             ii. renewal and maintenance of  soil fertility 
 

 
 

 
Candidates should be able to: 

7.  Humans and Environment 
i.            identify ecological conditions that favour the spread 

 
of common endemic and potentially epidemic 

             (a)    Diseases:  
diseases e.g. malaria, meningitis, drancunculiasis, 

                    (i)    Common and endemic diseases 
schistosomiasis, onchocerciasis, typhoid fever and 

 
cholera. 

 
ii.             relate the biology of the vector or agent of each 

 
disease with its spread and control 

 
iii.            define drug abuse and addiction 

ii. Easily transmissible diseases and    
iv.            list the commonly abused drugs 

disease syndrome such as: 
 v.            state the effects of drug abuse on human health 

-  poliomyelitis 
vi.          use the knowledge of the causative organisms, mode of 

-  cholera 
transmission and symptoms of the listed diseases to 

-  tuberculosis 
their prevention - treatment - control 

-  sexually transmitted disease/syndrome  
vii.           apply the principles of inoculation and vaccination  

(gonorrhea, syphilis, AIDS, etc.) 
                on disease prevention. 

 
viii.          categorize pollution into air, water and soil 

b. Drug abuse: 
ix.             relate the effects of common pollutants to human   

i. Drug addiction 
                 health and environmental degradation. 

ii. Commonly abused drugs 

35 
 



Biology 
 

                                                             

iii. Prevention of drug abuse x.              determine the methods by which each pollutant may  
                         be controlled. 

 xi.              explain the importance of sanitation with emphasis 
c. Pollution and its control  on solid waste, sewage disposal, community health 

(i)    Sources, types, effects and methods and personal hygiene. 
of control. xii.              assess the roles and functions of international and     

                   national health agencies e.g. World Health     
(ii)  Sanitation and sewage                   Organization (WHO), United Nations 

 International   
                   Children Emergency Fund (UNICEF),  

                   International Red Cross Society (IRCS) and the  
                   ministries of health and environment. 
  xiii.           apply the various methods of conservation of both    

d. Conservation of Natural Resources                   the renewable and non-renewable natural 
 resources  
                   for the protection of our environment for present  
                   and future generations. 
 xiv.            outline the benefits of conserving natural  
                   resources, prevention of desertification. 
 xv.             identify the bodies responsible for the 
 conservation  
                   of resources at the national and international levels      
                   e.g. Nigerian Conservation Foundation (NCF),  
                   Federal Ministry of Environment, Nigeria 
 National  

e. Game reserves and National parks                   Parks, World Wildlife Foundation (WWF),  
            International Union for Conservation of Nature   
            (IUCN), United Nations Environmental   
                   Programme (UNEP) and their activities. 
 xvi             identify and state the location and importance of   
                   game reserves and National parks in Nigeria 
  
  
D: HEREDITY AND VARIATIONS Candidates should be able to: 
 i.                  differentiate between continuous and discontinuous   
(I)  Variation In Population                      variations with examples. 
 ii.                 relate the role of environmental conditions, habitat  

   a.  Morphological variations in the physical                      and the genetic constitution to variation. 
        appearance of individuals. iii.                measure heights and weights of pupils of the same  

                age group 
(i)   size (height and weight)  iv.                plot graphs of frequency distribution of the heights  

                     and weights. 
(ii)   Colour (skin, eye, hair, coat  of  v.                 observe and record various colour patterns in some  

                 animals, scales and feathers).                     plants and animals. 
 vi.                apply classification of fingerprints in identity   

     (iii)   Fingerprints                                  detection. 
 vii.               identify some specific examples of  

b. Physiological variation                       physiological variation among human population. 
(i)   Ability to roll tongue  viii.              categorize people according to their physiological  
(ii)  Ability to taste                         variation.  

                  phenylthiocarbamide (PTC)   
                       (iii)   Blood groups  
 ix.                apply the knowledge of blood groups in       

c. Application of discontinuous                      blood transfusion and determination of  paternity. 
        variation in crime detection,    x.                 use discontinuous variation in crime  detection. 
        blood transfusion and    
        determination of paternity.   
  

  

36 
 



Biology 
 

                                                             

  
2.    Heredity Candidates should be able to: 
 i.                   determine heritable and non-heritable  characters  

   a) Inheritance of characters in organisms                      with examples. 
    (i)  Heritable characters ii.                  illustrate simple structure of DNA 
    (ii) Non-heritable characters  

 iii.                 illustrate segregation of genes at meiosis and  
   b) Chromosomes – the basis of heredity                       recombination of genes at fertilization to account  

                      for the process of transmission of characters from  
 (i)   Structure                       parents to offsprings. 

    (ii)  Process of transmission of   hereditary       
characters from parents to offsprings. iv.                 deduce that segregation of genes occurs during  

                      gamete formation and that recombination of genes   
     c) Probability in genetics and sex                      at fertilization is random in nature. 

determination.  
 v.                  analyze data on cross-breeding experiments. 

     d) Application of the principles of heredity in: vi.                 apply the principles of heredity in the production of    
                  new varieties of crops and livestock through cross-   

      i) Agriculture                      breeding. 
 vii.                deduce advantages and disadvantages of out-    

 (ii)  Medicine                      breeding and in-breeding. 
 viii.               analyze elementarily the contentious issues of  
                 genetically modified organisms (GMO) and gene   
                      therapy and biosafety. 
  
 ix.                 apply the knowledge of heredity in marriage   

e) Sex – linked characters e.g. baldness,                       counselling with particular  reference to blood  
    haemophilia, colour blindness, etc.                      grouping, sickle-cell anaemia and the Rhesus  

                      factors. 
 x.                  describe the significance of using recombinant 
 DNA      
                      materials in the production of important medical  
                 products such as insulin, interferon and enzymes. 
 xi.                 identify characters that are sex linked. 
  
  

3. Biotechnology Candidates should be able to: 
 i.                   define biotechnology 

a) Application of Biotechnology in ii.                  list some applications in agriculture, medicine,   
(i) Agriculture                       pharmaceutical and food industries 
(ii) Medicine 
(iii) Pharmaceuticals, and 
(iv) Food industry 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

37 
 



Biology 
 

                                                             

 
 
 
 

E: EVOLUTION 
 

TOPICS / CONTENTS / NOTES OBJECTIVES 

  
1.    Theories of evolution Candidates should be able to: 
                   a) Lamarck’s theory i.                    relate organic evolution as the sum total of all    

       b) Darwin’s theory                adaptive changes that have taken place over a  
c) organic theory                       long period of time resulting in the diversity of  

                forms, structures and functions among  
                       organisms. 
  
 ii.                   explain the contributions of Lamarck and Darwin  
                 to the theory of evolution. 
 iii.                  state the evidences in support of organic evolution 
  
  
  
2.  Evidence of evolution iv.                   mention the evidences for evolution such as      
                   fossil records, comparative anatomy, physiology  

                  and embryology. 
 
v.                    trace evolutionary trends in plants and animals. 
 
vi.                   state the evidence of modern evolutionary   

                theories such as genetic studies and the role of   
                       mutation. 
 
 

 

  

38 
 



Biology 
 

                                                             

 

RECOMMENDED TEXTS 

 
 
Ndu, F.O. C. Ndu, Abun A. and Aina J.O. (2001) Senior Secondary School Biology: 
                        Books 1 -3, Lagos: Longman 
 
Odunfa, S.A. (2001) Essential of Biology, Ibadan: Heinemann 
 
Ogunniyi M.B. Adebisi A.A. and Okojie J.A. (2000) Biology for Senior Secondary Schools: Books 1 – 3, Macmillan 
 
Ramalingam, S.T. (2018) Modern Biology, SS Science Series. New Edition, AFP 
 
Stan. (2004) Biology for Senior Secondary Schools. Revised Edition, Ibadan: Heinemann 
 
Stone R.H. and Cozens, A.B.C. (1982) Biology for West African Schools. Longman 
 
Usua, E.J. (1997) Handbook of practical Biology 2nd Edition, University Press, Limited 
 
Idodo – Umeh, G (2015) College Biology. Idodo – Umeh Publishers Ltd. 
 
Micheal, M.C. (2018) Essential Biology for Senior Secondary Schools. TONAD Publishers Ltd. 
 

39


Christian Religious Studies 
 

CHRISTIAN RELIGIOUS STUDIES 

 
GENERAL OBJECTIVES 

 
The aim of the Unified Tertiary Matriculation Examination (UTME) syllabus in Christian 
Religious Studies is to prepare the candidates for the Board’s examination.  It is designed to test 
their achievement of the course objectives, which are to: 
 
1. acquire the knowledge and understanding of the tenets of the Christian faith as contained 

in the Bible; 
 
2. interpret biblical teachings and themes; 
 
3. apply biblical teachings and tenets to life in society; 
 
4.          evaluate the level of application of biblical teachings and tenets to life in society. 
 
The syllabus is divided into four sections, namely: 
 
SECTION A: Themes from Creation to the Division of the Kingdom 
 
SECTION B: Themes from the Division of the Kingdom to the Return from Exile and the 

Prophets 
 
SECTION C: Themes from the four Gospels and Acts of the Apostles 
 
SECTION D: Themes from selected Epistles 
 

DETAILED SYLLABUS 
 

TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

SECTION A:  
Themes from Creation to the Division of the Candidates should be able to: 
Kingdom  
  
1. The Sovereignty of God i. define the term ‘sovereignty’ 
 God as Creator and Controller of the Universe ii. analyse God’s process of creation; 

(Gen. 1 and 2) cf. Amos 9:5-6; Is. 45:5-12 iii. interpret the sequence of creation; 
        Ps. 19:1-6; Jer. 18:1-16; Rom. 8:28. iv. identify man’s role in advancing God’s purpose 
 in creation; 
 v.   recognize the sovereignty of God in the affairs of 
 man and nations. 
  
  
  
  

53 
 



Christian Religious Studies 
 

TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

  
2. The Covenant Candidates should be able to: 

(a) The flood and God’s covenant with Noah i. explain the concept of covenant; 
(Gen. 6:1-22; 7:1-24; 9:1-17) ii. examine the importance and implication of the 

(b) God’s covenant with Abraham (Gen. covenants; 
11:31-32; 12:1-9; 17:1-21; 21:1-13; iii. distinguish between God’s covenants with Noah, 
25:19-26) Abraham and Israel; 

(c) God’s covenant with Israel (Ex. 19; 20; iv. Distinguish between the old and the new 
24:1-11) cf. Deut. 28:1-19 covenants. 

(d) The New Covenant (Jer. 31:31-34; Ezek.  
36:25-28)  

  
3. Leadership Qualities Candidates should be able to: 
 Examples of  i. examine the circumstances that gave rise to the 

(a) Joseph (Gen. 37:1-28; 41:1-57; 45:1-15) leadership of Joseph, Moses, Joshua and the 
(b) Moses (Ex. 1; 2; 3; 4:1-17; 5; 12; Num. Judges; 

13:1-20; 14:1-19) ii. identify the major talents of these leaders; 
(c) Joshua (Num. 13:21-33; 27:15-23; Josh. iii. assess God’s role in the works of these leaders; 

1:1-15; 6; 7; 24:1-31) iv. analyse the achievements of these leaders. 
(d) Judges (Deborah - Judges. 4:1-24;  

Gideon:  Judges 6:11-40; Samson : Judges  
13:1-7, 21-25; 16:4-31)  

  
4. Divine Providence, Guidance and Protection Candidates should be able to: 

(a) Guidance (Ex. 13:17-22; Josh. 8:1-22; i. identify the different ways by which God guided 
Heb 1:1; Matt. 11: 27-30) and protected the people of Israel; 

(b) Protection (Ex. 14:10-31; Dan 6:16-23; ii. specify how God provided for His people; 
Ps. 91) iii. identify the different occasions when God 

(c) Provision (Ex. 16:1-21; 17:1-7; 13:20-22; provided for Israel. 
1Kgs 17:1-16; Num: 20:1-13) iv.   recognize that God still provides for people 

 today 
  
  
5. Parental Responsibility Candidates should be able to: 
 Examples of i. . determine the extent to which Eli, Samuel and 

(a) Eli and Samuel (1 Sam. 2:11-36; 3:2-18; David were responsible for the short-comings of 
4:10-22: 8:15) their children; 

(b) David (11 Sam. 13; 15:1-29; 18; 19:1-8) ii. describe how Asa pleased God. 
(c) Asa (1 Kings 15:9-15; 22:41-44; cf. Deut.  

6:4-9; Prov. 4:1-10; 13:1; 24; 22:6; 23:13-  
14; 31:10-31)  

  
6.     Obedience and Disobedience Candidates should be able to: 
 (i) Obedience and Rewards: i. determine why Abraham, the Three Hebrew 
 Examples of Youths and David obeyed God; 

(a) Abraham (Gen. 22:1-19) ii. identify the rewards for obedience. 
(b) Three Hebrew Youths (Dan. 3:1-30)  
(c) David (1 Sam. 30:1-20)  

  
 ii)  Disobedience and Consequences Candidates should be able to: 
  Examples of i. compare the disobedience of Adam, the people 

(a) Adam (Gen. 2:15-25; 3) of Israel, Moses and Saul; 
(b) Collection of Manna (Ex. 16:22-30) ii. indicate the reasons for their disobedience; 
(c) The Golden Calf (Ex. 32) iii. identify the consequences of disobedience. 

54 
 



Christian Religious Studies 
 

TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

(d) Moses (Num. 20:7-12; Deut. 34:1-6)  
(e) Saul (1 Sam. 10:1-16; 15:1-25; 16:14-23;  

31:1-13)  
  
7. A man after God’s own heart Candidates should be able to: 

(a) The early life of David (1 Sam. 16:1-13; i. identify David’s anointing experience; 
17; 18:17-30; 22:1-5; 24:1-23; II Sam. ii. specify how David submitted to the will of God; 
2:1-7; 3:1-39) iii. examine the situations that led to David’s sin 

(b) David’s submission to the will of God      and repentance; 
(I Sam. 26:1-25, II Sam 12:15-25) iv.   identify the consequences of David’s sin; 

(c) David’s repentance and forgiveness (II v. identify why God forgave David. 
Sam. 11; 12:1-15, cf. Ps. 51:130)  

  
  
8. Decision - Making Candidates should be able to: 

(a) Reliance on a medium (I Sam. 28:3-25) i. identify the source of Solomon’s wisdom; 
(b) The wisdom of Solomon (I Kings 3:3-28; ii. compare the different ways used by Saul and 

4:29-34; 5:1-12; 8:1-53) Solomon in making decisions; 
(c) Unwise policies of Solomon and iii. analyse the decisions made by Saul, Solomon 

Rehoboam (I Kings 9:15-23; 11:1-40; and Rehoboam; 
12:1-20) iv. assess the consequences of Solomon and 

 Rehoboam’s unwise decisions. 
  
  
  
SECTION B:  
Themes from the Division of the Kingdom to the Candidates should be able to: 
Return from Exile and the Prophets i. deduce the meaning of greed; 
 ii. distinguish between Ahab and Gehazi’s greed; 
1. Greed and its effects iii. analyse the consequences of Ahab and Gehazi’s 
 Examples of greed. 

(a) Ahab (I Kings 21:1-29; 22:1-40; II Kings  
9:30-37)  

(b) Gehazi (II Kings 5:1-27 cf ( Josh 7)  
  
  
2. The Supremacy of God Candidates should be able to: 
 Religious tension and the power of God on i. assess the religious situation in Israel at the time 

Mount Carmel (I Kings 16:29-34; 17:1-7; 18; of Elijah and Ahab; 
19:1-18) ii. identify the characters involved in the contest on 

 Mount Carmel; 
 iii. differentiate between God’s power and that of 
 Baal. 
  
  
3. Religious reforms in Judah Candidates should be able to: 

(a) Cleansing of the Temple (II Kings 22) i. analyse Josiah’s religious reforms; 
(b) Renewal of the Covenant (II Kings 23:1- ii. determine the reasons for the renewal of the 

30) covenant; 
 iii. assess the significance of the reforms. 
  
  
4. Concern for Judah Candidates should be able to: 

(a) The fall of Jerusalem (II kings 24; 25:1- i. identify the reasons for the fall of Jerusalem; 

55 
 



Christian Religious Studies 
 

TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

17) ii. examine the condition of Judah during the exile; 
(b) Condition of Judah (Neh. 1:1-11; Ezra iii. analyse the people’s response to the call of 

1:1-11) Nehemiah and Ezra to rebuild Jerusalem; 
(c) Response to the state of Judah (Neh. 2; iv. distinguish between Nehemiah and Ezra’s 

4:1-23 Ezra 3:4; 5; 6; 7) responses to the opposition of their enemies. 
  
  
5. Faith, Courage and Protection Candidates should be able to: 

Examples of Daniel, Shadrach, Meshach and   i. analyse the stories of Shadrach, Meshach, 
Abednego (Dan. 3:1-30: 6:1-28 Abednego and Daniel; 

 ii. determine the occasions in which the four men 
 demonstrated faith; 
 iii. analyse the effects of the faith of the four men 
 on the Babylonians; 
 iv. identify the qualities of faith by four men worthy 
 of emulation 
  
  
6.    God’s message to Nineveh Candidates should be able to: 
 Jonah and his message (Jonah 1; 2; 3 and 4) i. analyse the story of Jonah’s call; 
 ii. describe the consequences of Jonah’s 
 disobedience; 
 iii. assess the effect of Jonah’s message on the 
 Ninevites; 
 iv. emulate the example of the Ninevites. 
  
  
7. Social justice, True religion and Divine love Candidates should be able to: 

(a) Social justice and true religion (Amos i. determine what true religion is; 
2:6-8; 4; 5:1-25; 6:1-14; 7:10-17; 8:4-14) ii. identify the ills that led to the call for social 
cf James 1:19-27 justice in Amos’ time; 

(b) Divine love and human response (Hosea iii.  identify the punishment meted for evil deeds;  
1; 2; 3; 4; 6:1-11; 14) iv. examine the condition in Israel during Hosea’s 

 time; 
 v. analyse Hosea’s portrayal of divine love and 
 human response. 
  
  
8. Holiness and Divine call Candidates should be able to: 
 (Isaiah 6:1-13; Ezek. 2; 3:1-11; Jer. 1:4-10) i.     analyze the vision of Isaiah on God’s holiness 
 ii. distinguish the calls of Isaiah, Ezekiel and 
 Jeremiah; 
 iii. compare the assignments given to these 
 prophets; 
 iv. determine the need for God’s people to be holy. 
  
  
9. Punishment and Hope Candidates should be able to: 
 (Jer. 3:11-18; 32:26-35; Ezek. 18; 37:1-14; i. describe the situations that led to the punishment 
 Isaiah 61; Jer. 4:5-8) of Israel; 
 ii. identify the conditions for hope; 
 iii. determine the benefits of restoration. 
  
  

56 
 



Christian Religious Studies 
 

TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

SECTION C:  
Themes from the four Gospels and the Acts of the Candidates should be able to: 
Apostles i. compare the stories of the births of John and 
 Jesus; 
1. The birth and early life of Jesus ii. assess the importance of John as the forerunner 

(a) John, the forerunner of Jesus (Lk. 1:5-25; of Jesus; 
57-66; 3:1-20; 7:18-35; Mk. 1:1-8; 6:14- iii. describe the boyhood of Jesus. 
29; Mt. 3:1-12: Matt.11:2-19; Jn. 1:6-8;  
19-37; 3:22-36)  

(b) The birth and boyhood of Jesus (Mt. 1:18-  
25; 2; Lk. 1:26-45;2 )  

  
  
2. The baptism and temptation of Jesus Candidates should be able to: 
 (Mt. 3:13-17; 4:1-11; Mk. 1:9-13; Lk. 3:21-22; i. determine the meaning and purpose of the 

4:1-13) baptism of Jesus 
 ii. enumerate the temptations of Jesus; 
 iii. examine the significance of the temptations of 
 Jesus. 
 iv.   describe how Jesus overcame the temptations. 
  
  
3. Discipleship Candidates should be able to: 

(a) The call of the first disciples (Mt. 4:18- i. identify the first disciples to be called by Jesus; 
22; 9:9-13; Mk. 1:16-20; 2:13-17; Lk. ii. determine the demands of discipleship; 
5:1-11; 27-32)  

(b) The demands of discipleship (Mt. 8:19-  
22; Lk. 9:57-63; 14:25-33)  

  
  
4. Miracles Candidates should be able to: 
 (a) Nature miracles i. classify the different miracles of Jesus; 

(i) Stilling the storm (Mt. 8:23-27; Mk. ii. indicate the occasion of each of the miracles; 
4:35-41; Lk.8:22-25) iii. examine the significance of each of the miracles; 

(ii) Feeding of the five thousand (Mt.  
14:13-24; Mk. 6:30-44; Lk. 9:10-17;  
Jn. 6:1-13)  

(iii) Walking on the sea (Mt. 14:22-26;  
Mk. 6:45-52; Jn. 6:16-21)  

(iv) Changing water to wine (Jn. 2:1-11)  
 (b) Miracles of resuscitation  

(i) The raising of Lazarus (Jn. 11:1-45)  
(ii) The raising of Jairus’ daughter (Lk.  

8:41-42, 49-56; Mk. 5:21-43)  
(iii) The raising of the widow’s son at  

Nain (Lk. 7:11-17)  
 (c) Healing miracles  

(i) The lepers (Mt. 8:1-4; Mk. 1:40-45;  
Lk. 5:12-16; 17:11-19)  

(ii) The paralytic at the pool (Jn. 5:1-17)  
(iii) The centurion’s servant (Mt. 8:5-13;  

Lk. 7:1-10)  
(iv) The blind (Jn. 9:1-12; Mk. 10:46-52;  

Lk. 18:35-43)  

57 
 



Christian Religious Studies 
 

TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

 (d) Exorcism  
(i) The Gerasene (Gadarene) demoniac  

(Mt. 8:28-34; Mk. 5:1-20; Lk. 8:26-  
39)  

(ii) The epileptic boy (Mk. 9:14-29; Lk.  
9:37-43a; Mt. 17:14-21)  

  
5. The Parables Candidates should be able to: 
 (a) Parables of the kingdom i.     define a parable;  

(i) The sower (Mt. 13:1-23; Mk. 4:1-20) ii. classify the different parables of Jesus; 
(ii)  The weeds (Mt. 13:24-30; 36-43) iii. identify the occasion of each parable; 
(iii) The drag-net (Mt. 13:47-50) iv. interpret the meaning of each parable; 
(iv) The wedding garment (Matt. 22:1-14) v. give reasons why Jesus taught in parables. 

(b) Parables about love of God (Mt. 18:12-  
 14; Lk. 15:1-32)  
 (c) Parables about love for one another  
  (Lk.10:25-37; 16:19-31)  
 (d) Parable about wealth: The rich fool (Lk.  
  12:13-21)  
       (e)   Parables on prayer (Lk. 18:2-14)  
  
  
6.      Sermon on the Mount Candidates should be able to: 
         (Mt. 5; 6; Lk. 6:17-26) i. analyse the teachings on the Mount; 
 ii. identify the demands of the Kingdom; 
 iii. determine the consequences of placing worldly 
 possessions above heavenly treasures; 
 iv. associate the rewards for obedience with the 
 Sermon  on the Mount. 
  
  
7.      Mission of the disciples Candidates should be able to: 
         (a)The mission of the twelve i. distinguish between the mission of the twelve 
         (Mt. 10:5-15; Mk. 6:7-13; Lk. 9:1-16) and  the seventy; 
         (b)The mission of the seventy (Lk. 10:1-24) ii. specify the instructions to the disciples; 
 iii. assess the outcomes of the missions. 
  
8.       The Great Confession Candidates should be able to: 
          (Mt. 16:13-20; Mk. 8:27-30; Lk. 9:18-22) i. analyse the confession by Peter; 
 ii. identify the occasion of the Great Confession; 
 iii. examine the significance of the Great 
 Confession. 
  
  
9.        The Transfiguration Candidates should be able to: 
           (Mt. 17:1-13; Mk. 9:2-13; Lk. 9:28-36) i. trace the events leading to the Transfiguration; 
 ii. identify the personalities involved in the  
 Transfiguration account. 
 iii. determine the significance of the Transfiguration 
 to the disciples; 
  
  
10.   The Triumphal Entry and the Candidates should be able to: 
        cleansing of the Temple i. recount the Triumphal Entry and the cleansing of 

58 
 



Christian Religious Studies 
 

TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

        (Mt. 21:1-17; Mk. 11:1-19; Lk. 19:29-48) the Temple; 
 ii. determine the significance of the Triumphal 
 Entry and the cleansing of the Temple; 
 iii. examine how the cleansing of the Temple caused 
 hostility towards Jesus. 
  
11.     The Last Supper Candidates should be able to: 
          (Mt. 26:17-30; Mk. 14:10-26 i. trace the story of the Last Supper; 
           Lk. 22:7-23; Jn. 13:2-38) ii. evaluate the significance of the Last Supper. 
  
  
  
12.     The trials and the death of Jesus Candidates should be able to: 
            (a)  The trials of Jesus before i. analyse the different trials of Jesus; 
                  (i)  the High Priest ii. describe the crucifixion and burial of Jesus; 
                        (Mt. 26:36-75; iii. deduce the lessons of the death of Jesus. 
                         Mk. 14:53-72 iv.   recount the statements of Jesus on the cross 
                         Lk. 22:66-71)  
  
                  (ii) Pilate  
                        (Mt. 27:11-26; Mk. 15:1-15;  
                         Lk. 23:1-5; 13-25;  
                        Jn. 18:28-40; 19:1-16)  
  
                  (iii) Herod  
                        (Lk. 23:6-12)  
  
            (b) Crucifixion and burial of Jesus  
                  (Mt. 27:32-66; Lk. 23:26-56;  
                  Mk. 15:16-47; Jn. 19:17-42)  
  
13.    Resurrection, appearances Candidates should be able to: 
         and ascension of Jesus (i)   trace the stories of the resurrection, appearances 
         (Mt. 28:1-20; Mk. 16:1-20; and ascension of Jesus; 
         Lk. 24:1-53; Jn. 20:1-31;  (ii) compare the personalities involved in the stories; 
         Acts 1:1-11) (iii) analyse the relevance of the resurrection, 
        appearances and ascension of Jesus. 
     
   
14.   Jesus’ teachings about  Candidates should be able to: 
        Himself (i)   analyse the different teachings 
        (a)  The Bread of Life and the        of Jesus about Himself; 
               Living Water (Jn. 4:7-15; (ii) deduce the reasons for Jesus’ teachings about      
               6:25-58)       Himself; 
         (b)  The Light of the World (iii) interpret the meanings of the 
                (Jn. 1:4-8; 3:19-21; 8:12;        symbols used by Jesus about 
                9:1-5; 12:35-36; 1 Jn. 1:5-7)        Himself. 

(c) The Door, the Lamb and the Good  
               Shepherd (Jn. 1:29-34; 10:1-18)  

(d) The True Vine (Jn. 15:1-11)  
(e) The Resurrection (Jn.11:25)  

  
  
  

59 
 



Christian Religious Studies 
 

TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

15.     Love Candidates should be able to: 
          (a) God’s love for man (i)   describe God’s love for man; 
               (Jn. 3:16-18) (ii)   identify various types of love;  
          (b) Love for one another (iii)  specify the ways they can love one another; 
               (Jn. 13:34-35; 15:12-13; 1 cor. 13;  (iv)  evaluate the significance of love. 
               cf. I Jn. 4:7-21)  
  
16.     Fellowship in the Early Church Candidates should be able to: 
          (a)  Communal living (i)   identify the reasons for communal living in the 
                (Acts 1:15-26; 2:41-47; Early Church; 
                4:32-37) (ii)  identify the problems of communal living and 
          (b) Problems of communal  their solutions;  
                living and solutions (iii) examine how communal living helped the 
                (Acts 5:1-11, 6:1-6) growth of  the Early Church. 
         
  
17.    The Holy Spirit and the mission Candidates should be able to: 
          of the Church (i)   trace the story of the Pentecost; 

(a) The Pentecost (Acts 1:8; (ii)   identify the signs associated with the coming of 
                2:1-41) the Holy Spirit; 

(b) The mission of the Church (iii)  examine the significance of the Pentecost              
                (Acts 8:4-40)        experience; 
 (iv) analyse the mission of the Church. 
  
  
18.    Opposition to the Gospel message Candidates should be able to: 
         (a) The arrest and imprisonment of (i)   trace the story of the arrest and 
               Peter and John        imprisonment of Peter and John; 
               (Acts 3; 4:1-22; 5:17-42 (ii)  trace the events that led to the 
               12:1-24)        martyrdom of Stephen; 
        (b) The martyrdom of Stephen (iii) describe the role of Saul in the persecution of the       
               (Acts 6:8-15; 7)        Church; 

(c) Persecution by Saul (iv) evaluate the importance of persecution to the 
               (Acts 8:1-3; 9:1-2 growth of   the Church. 
               cf. Gal. 1:11-17) (v) account for the persecution of Paul. 

(d) Persecution of Paul (Acts 16:11-40;         
19:23- 41;21:27-36 cf 2 Cor:11:23-33)  

  
  
19.     Mission to the Gentiles Candidates should be able to: 
          (a)  Conversion of Saul (i)   compare the conversions of Saul 
                (Acts 9:1-30; 22:4-21;        and Cornelius; 
                26:9-18) (ii)  analyse the commissioning and 
           (b) Conversion of Cornelius        mission of Paul; 
                 (Acts 10:1-48) (iii) examine the main decisions at the Council of      
           (c) The commissioning and mission of Paul       Jerusalem; 
                 (Acts 13; 14:1-20) (iv)  identify the personalities 
           (d) The Council of Jerusalem         involved at the Council of Jerusalem; 
                 (Acts 15:1-35; Gal. 2:1-21) (v)   examine the relevance of the main decisions at 
 the Council of Jerusalem; 
 (vi)  assess Paul’s role in the mission 
         to the Gentiles. 
  
  

60 
 



Christian Religious Studies 
 

TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

  
SECTION D:  
Themes from Selected Epistles Candidates should be able to: 
1.      Justification by Faith (i)   interpret the phrase ‘justification 
         (Rom. 3:21-24; 5:1-11; 10:1-13; Gal. 2:16-         by faith’; 
         21) (ii)  identify the basic conditions for justification; 
 (iii) determine the fruits of justification. 
  
  
  
2.      The Law and Grace Candidates should be able to: 
         (Rom. 4:13-25; 5:18-21; (i)   examine the purpose and significance of the law    
         Gal. 3:10-14; 19-29; Rom. 3:24) and grace; 
 (ii)  identify the place of the Law among the Jews. 
         
  
3.       New life in Christ Candidates should be able to: 
         (Rom. 6:1-4; 12-14; Col. 3:1-17; (i)    describe the characteristics of 
          Gals. 5:16-26; II Cor. 5:16-19;         the old life; 
          I Thess. 4:1-8; Rom. 12) (ii)   analyse the new life in Christ; 
 (iii)  identify the conditions of the  
         new life; 
 (iv)  examine the benefits of the new life. 
  
  
4.      Christians as joint heirs with Christ Candidates should be able to: 
         (Gal. 3:23-29; 4:1-7) (i)  describe how Christians are 
       joint heirs with Christ; 
 (ii) recognize that males and females are all children 
 of God; 
 (iii) indicate the benefits of being 
       joint heirs with Christ. 
  
  
5.       Humility Candidates should be able to: 
          (Phil. 2:1-11; I Pet. 5:5-11) (i)  determine the meaning of humility; 
          (James 4;10; Matt. 23:12) (ii)   identify the requirements of humility; 
 (iii)  identify the rewards of humility. 
  
  
6.    Forgiveness Candidates should be able to: 
       (Philemon; II Cor. 2:5-11; Matt. 7;14-15) (i)  analyse Paul’s teaching on forgiveness; 
 (ii) assess the benefits of forgiveness; 
 (iii) recognize the need to forgive others. 
        
  
7.     Spiritual gifts Candidates should be able to: 
        (I Cor. 12; Rom. 12:3-18; I Cor. 14) (i)  identify the different spiritual gifts; 
 (ii) analyse the benefits of spiritual gifts to the 
 individual and the church; 
 (iii) differentiate between spiritual gifts and talents. 
  
  
  

61 
 



Christian Religious Studies 
 

TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

8.     Christian Giving Candidates should be able to: 
         (Phil. 4:14-20; II Cor. 8:1-5; 9 (i)   interpret the concept of Christian giving;       
          Cf. Matt 6:2-4) (ii)  relate the teachings of Paul on Christian giving; 
 (iii) identify the importance of Christian giving. 
  
  
9.     Civic responsibility Candidates should be able to: 
        (Rom. 13; I Tim. 2:1-4; 1Peter 2;13-17) (i)   identify the need for obedience to authority; 
 (ii) specify the requirements of good citizenship. 
  
  
10.     Dignity of labour Candidates should be able to: 
          (Matt. 20;1-16; II Thess. 3:6-15; Col. 3:23- (i)   interpret the concept of dignity of labour;       
          25) (ii) analyse the benefits of labour; 
 (iii) recognize that no particular kind of work leads 
 to loss of respect for personal dignity. 
  
  
11.    The second coming of Christ Candidates should be able to: 

a) The signs of the Coming of Christ (i)    identify the signs of the Second Coming of 
(1 Thess. 4:13-18; II Thess. 2:1-12) Christ; 

b) Preparation for His coming (ii)   specify the preparations for His coming; 
(Matt. 25;31-46; I Thess. 5:1-11; II Pet. (iii)  indicate what will happen during His Second 
3:1-13) Coming; 

 (iv) examine the importance of His coming. 
  
  
12.      Impartiality Candidates should be able to: 
           (James 2:1-13cf. Acts 10:34-35; Matt 7:1-5 (i)    interpret the concept of impartiality; 
           Luke 6:31) (ii)   identify causes of partiality; 
 (iii)  examine the consequences of partiality. 
  
  
13.      Effective prayer Candidates should be able to: 
           (James 1:2-8; 4:1-3; 5:13-18 cf.  (i)    identify the requirements of effective prayer; 
           Matt 6:5-13) (ii) distinguish between effective and ineffective 
 prayer; 
 (iii) identify the importance of prayer; 
 (iv) identify types of prayer. 
  
  
14.     Christian living in the community          Candidates should be able to: 

(a)  Interpersonal relationships (i)   determine interpersonal relationships among  
                 among Christians (I Pet. 5:1-4;        Christians; 
                 Rom. 12:3-21; 2 Pet. 1:3-11;  (ii)  analyse Christian living among non-Christians; 
     Heb.13:1-21) (iii) relate Christian attitude to persecution; 

(b) Christians living among non- Christians (iv) determine the relationship in the Christian          
                 (I Pet. 2:3-25; Rom. 15:1-2) family;         

(c)  Christian attitude to persecution (v) examine the importance of maintaining good 
                 (I Pet. 1:5-9; 4:1-19; 1 Pet. 3:13-22) relationships. 

(d) Relationship in the Christian family  
               (Eph. 6: 1-9; Col. 3:18-21;  
   I Pet. 3:1-7)  
  

62 
 



Christian Religious Studies 
 

TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

  
15.  Corruption    Candidates should be able to: 
        (1 Tim 6:6-11; 2 Tim 3:8; 2 Pet. 1:4-11;  (i) define the term corruption; 
        James  5:1-6) (ii) identify the causes of corruption; 
 (iii) determine the effects and consequences of 
 corruption; 
 (iv) identify ways of curbing corruption. 
  
16.  Sexual Immorality  Candidates should be able to: 
(a)   Prostitution (i) identify what constitute sexual immorality; 
       (1Cor.6:16-20 cf. Prov.7:10-27;23:27-28) (ii) determine the causes of sexual immorality; 
(b) Adultery and Fornication (iii) examine the effects and consequences of sexual 
      (Heb. 13:4, Eph. 5:3-10  cf. Matt 5:28-32;  immorality; 
       Deut. 22:22; Lev. 20:10) (iv) identify ways of curbing sexual immorality. 
(c) Homosexuality  
      (Rom. 1:24-32 cf. Lev.18:21-30; 20:13) 
 

 
 

63 
 



Christian Religious Studies 
 

RECOMMENDED TEXTS 

Adetunji, P.G. et al (2000) Exam Focus Christian Religious Knowledge for WASSCE and SSCE Ibadan: University 

Press Plc. 

Adeyemo, I. O. et al (1998) Christian Religious Knowledge for Secondary Schools Books1 – 3, Ibadan: Onibonoje 

Adeyinka, A. A. et al (1991) Christian Religious Knowledge for Senior Secondary Schools, Book 1 – 3, Lagos: 

Longman. 

Adigwe, H.A et al (2004) Christian Religious Knowledge for Senior Secondary Schools. Onitsha. Africana 

Publishers. 

Aghaeghuna, E. O. N. (1988) Senior Secondary School Christian Religious Knowledge: Themes from Selected 

Epistles, Vol 1 – III, Awka, Jet Publishers. 

Dopamu, A. et al (1990) Christian Religious Knowledge for Senior Secondary Schools Books 1 – 3, Lagos: Nelson. 

Ilori, J. A. et al (1980) Christian Religious Knowledge for Senior Secondary Schools Books 1 – 3, Ibadan: Evans. 

Izuchukwu, A.E. et al (1997) Round-Up for Senior Secondary Certificate Examination Christian Religious 

Knowledge: A Complete Guide. Lagos: Longman. 

Throckmorton, B.H, Jr. (ed) (1966) Gospel Parallels: A Synopsis of the First Three Gospels. New York; Thomas 

Nelson. 

L.O. Udokporo, C.O. Okemiri, Y.A. Olaomo (2012) Christian Religious studies for Senior Secondary Schools 

Books 1 – 3 Sango-Ota, Ogun State, Nigeria : Melrose Books and Publishers Limited. 

Edmund Ugochukwu Okoli, Bosede Olabisi Orovwuje (2008) Essential Christian Religious Knowledge for Senior 

Secondary Schools, Lagos, Nigeria, Tonad Publishers Limited. 

THE BIBLE: Revised Standard Version, Stonechill Green: Bible Society Publishing House (1971). 

 
COMMERCE 
 

GENERAL OBJECTIVES 
 
The aim of the Unified Tertiary Matriculation Examination (UTME) syllabus in Commerce is to 
prepare the candidates for the Board’s examination.  It is designed to test their understanding of 
the course objectives, which are to: 
 

(1) acquire the basic knowledge of Commerce; 
(2) examine the relationship between Commerce and other related fields; 
(3) apply the principles of Commerce in the Nigerian economy and 
(4) appreciate dynamic and positive changes in commercial activities. 

 
  

DETAILED SYLLABUS 
 

TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

  
1. Commerce Candidates should be able to: 

  
(i) Meaning of e-commerce/ e-business (i) Identify the functions of e-commerce/ e-
(ii) Meaning and scope business 
(iii) Characteristics (ii) differentiate between Commerce and other 
(iv) Functions related subjects; 

 (iii) describe the characteristics of Commerce; 
 (iv) Identify the functions of Commerce. 
 
  
 

2. Occupation Candidates should be able to: 

  

(i) Meaning and importance (i) State the importance of occupation; 

(ii) Types (industrial, commercial and (ii) Compare the different types of occupation; 

services) (iii) Identify the factors determining the choice 

(iii) Factors that determine choice of of occupation. 

occupation  

  

  

3. Production Candidates should be able to: 

  

(i) Factors, characteristics and rewards (i) identify the Factors of Production and their 

(land, labour, capital and entrepreneur) rewards; 

(ii) Division of Labour and specialization (ii) distinguish between Division of Labour 

(iii) Types (primary, secondary and and Specialization; 

tertiary) (iii) classify the types of production. 

(iv) Relationship between production, (iv) State the relationship between production, 

specialization and exchange. specialization and exchange. 

  

  

  

  

64 
 



TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

4. Trade Candidates should be able to: 
  

a. Home Trade (i) compare the various types of retail trade 
(i) Retail trade: (ii) identify the functions of retailers; 

- Types of retail trade (iii) highlight the factors in setting up retail 
- Functions of retailers trade; 
- Factors to be considered in setting (iv) classify modern retailing practices; 

up retail trade (v) identify the advantages and disadvantages 
- Trends in retailing (branding, self - of retail business; 

service, vending machines, the use (vi) explain the success/failure of retail trade 
of luncheon, fuel vouchers, etc)  

- Advantages and disadvantages of  
retailers  

- Reasons for success/failure of  
retail trade   

  
(ii) Wholesale trade: (vii) classify the types of wholesalers; 

- Types of wholesalers (merchant, (viii) identify the channels of distribution 
agent, general, etc) (ix) discuss the functions of wholesalers; 

- Channels of distribution  (x) outline the merits and demerits of the 
- Functions of wholesalers middleman; 
- Advantages and disadvantages of  

wholesalers  
  

b. Foreign trade  
(i) Types of foreign trade (xi) compare the various types of foreign trade 
(ii) Basic issues in foreign trade (balance of (xii) analyse the basic issues in foreign trade; 

trade, balance of payments and counter (xiii) explain the procedures and documents used 
trade) in foreign trade; 

(iii) Procedures and documents used in (xiv) identify the barriers to international trade; 
export, import and entrepôt trade (xv) state the various tariffs and reasons for 

(iv) Barriers to international trade their imposition 
(v) Tariffs and reasons for the imposition (xvi) identify the tools for trade restriction and 
(vi) Tools for trade restriction and export export promotion 

promotion  (xvii) appraise the role of government agencies in 
(vii) Role of Customs and Excise Authority, foreign trade. 

Ports Authority, etc. in foreign trade  
  

5. Purchase and Sale of Goods Candidates should be able to: 
  
(i) Procedure and documentation (i) examine the procedures and documents 

(enquiry, quotation, order, invoice, used in the purchase and sale of goods; 
proforma invoice, statement of (ii) determine the terms of trade; 
accounts, indent, consular invoice, bill (iii) distinguish between cash and credit forms 
of  lading, certificate of origin, of payment; 
consignment note, etc.)  
  

(ii) Terms of trade (trade discount,  
quantity discount, cash discount,  
warranties, C.O.D., C.I.F., F.O.B., and  
E.O.E. etc)  

  
(iii) Terms of payments  

 

65 
 



TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

a. Cash – Spot/Prompt payment  
  

b. Credit- Meaning (iv) explain the meaning and types of credit; 
(v) analyse the merits and demerits of credit 

-  Types and functions 
transactions. 

-  Merits and demerits 
 
 

(iv)       Means of payments; Legal tender (bank (vi) Identify the means of payment 
notes and coins), cheques, standing  
order, bank draft, stamps, postal orders,  
money orders, bills of exchange,  

promissory note, mail, transfer,  

traveler’s cheques, telegraphic transfer,  
 

e-payment, recharge card.    
 
 

 
 

6. Aids-to-trade Candidates should be able to: 
a. Advertising:  

(i) Meaning and roles (i) Explain the meaning and role of 
(ii) Types, media and methods advertising  

(iii) Advantages and disadvantages (ii) identify the different types of  
advertising, its media and methods 

 (iii) analyse the advantages and disadvantages 
of advertising; 

  

b. Banking: (iv) categorize the different types of bank; 
(v) assess the services rendered by banks; 

(i) Types of bank 
(vi) identify the challenges facing banks; 

(ii) Services (vii) explain e-banking 
(iii) Challenges  
(iv) E-banking  

  

c. Communication: (viii) assess the different stages in the 

(i) Process and procedure communication process; 
(ix) analyse the types of communication; 

(ii) Types 
(x) appraise the contributions of courier 

(iii) Trends services, GSM, etc., to businesses; 
(iv) Merits and demerits (xi) state the merits and demerits of 
(v) Barriers communication; 
(vi)  (xii) outline the barriers to communication 

  

d. Insurance: (xiii) describe the types of insurance; 
(xiv) apply the principles of insurance to life 

(i) Types 
situations; 

(ii) Principles 
(xv) explain the terms in insurance; 

(iii) Terms (xvi) state the importance of insurance; 
(iv) Importance  (xvii) identify the different types of risk in 
(v) Types of risk insurance 

  

e. Tourism:  
(xviii) explain the meaning and forms of tourism 

(i) Meaning and forms 
(xix) examine the importance of tourism; 

(ii) Importance  

66 
 



TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

(iii) Agencies that promote tourism in (xx) identify the agencies that promote tourism 
Nigeria  in Nigeria; 

(iv) Challenges (xxi) analyse the challenges facing tourism in 
Nigeria; 

(v) Tourist centres 
(xxii) identify the various tourist centres in 

 
Nigeria  

  

f. Transportation: (xxiii) appraise the relevance of the various  
modes of transportation; 

(i) Mode 
(xxiv) list the importance of transportation; 

(ii) Importance 
(xxv) discuss the advantages and disadvantages 

(iii) Advantages and disadvantages of transportation; 
  
  
g. Warehousing: (xxvi) highlight the importance of warehousing; 

(i) Importance (xxvii) appraise the contributions of warehouses to 
businesses. 

(ii) Types and functions 
(xxviii) evaluate the factors that determine the 

(iii) Factors to be considered in siting 
siting of warehouses. 

a warehouse 
 

 
 
 

 
 

7. Business Units Candidates should be able to: 

  

(i) Forms and features (Sole (i) identify the forms and features of business 

Proprietorship, Partnership, Limited units; 

Liability Companies, Public (ii) analyse the procedures for registering 

Corporations, Cooperative Societies, businesses; 

etc.) (iii) examine the factors which determine the 

(ii) Registration of businesses choice of business units; 

(iii) Determination of choice of business (iv) differentiate between dissolution and 

units liquidation of business; 

(iv) Dissolution and liquidation  (v) state the merits and demerits of business 

(v) Merits and demerits units. 

(vi) Reasons for government ownership of (vi) State the reasons for government 

public enterprises  ownership of public enterprises  

  

  

  

8. Financing Business Candidates should be able to: 

  

(i) Sources of finance (personal savings, (i) identify the various ways of financing a 

sale of shares and bonds, loans, business; 

debentures, mortgage, bank overdraft, (ii) discuss the different types of capital  

ploughing back of profit, credit (iii) compute the different forms of capital, 

purchase, leasing, etc.) profits and turnover; 

(ii) Types of capital (share capital, capital (iv) appraise the problems associated with 

owned, authorized capital, issued sourcing finances for business; 

capital, called-up capital, paid-up (v) assess the role of Bureau de change in an 

capital, liquid capital, working capital economy. 

and owners’ equity)  

(iii) Calculation of forms of capital, profits  
 

67 
 



TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

(gross and net) and turnover  
(iv) Problems of sourcing finance  
(v) The role of Bureau de change in an  

economy  
  
  

9. Trade Associations Candidates should be able to: 

  

(i) Objectives and functions of trade and (i) discuss the objectives and functions of 

manufacturer’s associations (Cocoa trade and manufacturer’s associations; 

Farmers’ Association, Garri Sellers’ (ii) list the objectives and functions of 

Association, Poultry Farmers’ Chambers of Commerce. 

Association, etc.) (iii) Explain the different forms of business 

 combination/merger 

(ii) Objectives and functions of Chambers  

of Commerce.  

  
 

(iii) Forms of business combination/merger 
 

 
 

 
 

10. Money Candidates should be able to: 
  
(i) Evolution (i) discuss the origin of money; 
(ii) Forms and qualities (ii) analyse the forms and qualities of money; 
(iii) Functions (iii) appraise the functions of money. 

  
  
  

11. Stock Exchange Candidates should be able to: 
  
(i) Importance and functions (i) state the importance and functions of the 
(ii) Types of securities (stocks, shares, Stock Exchange; 

bonds, debentures, etc) (ii) identify the different securities traded on 
(iii) Procedure of transactions and the Stock Exchange; 

speculations (iii) analyse the procedure of transactions and 
(iv) Second-Tier Securities Market, (listing speculations on the Stock Exchange; 

requirements, types of companies for (iv) appraise the advantages and operating 
the market, advantages and operating regulations of the market. 
regulations of the market.)  

  
  
  

12. Elements of Business Management Candidates should be able to: 
  
(i) Functions (planning, organizing, (i) appraise the functions of management; 

staffing, coordinating, motivating, (ii) analyse the principles of management; 
communicating, controlling etc.) (iii) identify organizational structures; 

(ii) Principles (span of control, unity of (iv) assess the functional areas of business; 
command, delegation of authority, (v) examine the business resources. 
etc.)  

(iii) Organizational structure (line, line and  
staff, functional, matrix and  
committee)  

68 
 



TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

(iv) Functional areas of business  
(production, marketing, finance and  
personnel)  

(v) Business resources (man, money,  
materials, machines and  
opportunities/goodwill)  

  
  

13. Elements of Marketing Candidates should be able to: 
  
(i) Importance and Functions (i) highlight the importance and functions of 
(ii) The marketing concept (consumer marketing; 

orientation, customer satisfaction, (ii) discuss the marketing concept; 
integrated marketing, etc) (iii) assess the elements of marketing mix; 

(iii) Marketing mix (product, price, place (iv) explain market segmentation; 
and promotion) (v) examine public relations and customer 

(iv) Market Segmentation service. 
(v) Public relations and Customer Service. (vi) explain e-marketing 
(vi) E-marketing   
  

 
14. Legal Aspects of Business Candidates should be able to: 

 (i) analyse the elements and validity of a 
(i) Meaning and validity of a simple simple contract; 

contract (ii) examine Agency, Sale of Goods Act and 
(ii) Agency, Sale of Goods Act and Hire Hire Purchase Act; 

Purchase Act (iii) assess the rights and obligations of 
(iii) Contract of employment employers and employees; 
(iv) Government regulations of business (iv) distinguish between patents, trademarks 

(registration of business, patents, and copyrights; 
trademarks, copyrights, etc) (v) identify the functions of consumerism; 
  

(v) Consumer protection (Government (vi) assess the relevance of regulatory agencies 
legislation, Standards Organization and acts in the provision of safe goods and 
Trade Descriptions Act, Consumer drugs. 
Protection Council, NAFDAC,  
NDLEA, Customs and Excise, etc.)  

(vi) Regulatory agencies.  
  
  

15. Commodity Exchange: Candidates should be able to: 
  

(i) Meaning  (i) explain the meaning of commodity 
(ii) Types of tradable commodity exchange 

(agricultural produce, solid (ii) highlight types of tradable commodity 
minerals, oil and gas) (iii) list the requirements for trading  

(iii) Requirements for trading (grading (iv) discuss methods of trading 
system, warehousing, clearing (v) enumerate the benefits of commodity 
system, standardizing)  exchange 

(iv) Methods of trading (open outcry, (vi) analyse the constraints to commodity 
electronic mechanism) trading. 

(v) Benefits of commodity exchange  
(vi) Constraints to commodity trading  

  

69 
 



TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

  
16. Business Environment and Social Candidates should be able to: 

Responsibility  
 (i) discuss the types of business environment; 
(i) Legal, political, economic, social, (ii) assess the role of social environment in the 

cultural, technological environments, provision of safe products; 
etc (iii) identify the different types of pollution and 

(ii) Safe products, philanthropic and their implications on businesses. 
societal consideration  

(iii) Types and implication of pollution 
(water, air, land, etc.) 

   

70 
 



RECOMMENDED TEXTS 

 

Adedokun, M.O., Udokogu, P.C and Ogunji, C.O.N Senior Secondary Commerce Book One, Two and 
Three. 

 
Anderson, D. J. (1978) Commerce for West Africa, London: Macmillan. 
 
Ahukannah, L. I. et al (1992) Commerce for Secondary Schools Onitsha: Africana – First Publishers. 
 
Asaolu, A. and Igwe, P. M. (2005) New Syllabus Commerce for Secondary Schools Books 1 – 3 (Second 

Edition) Ibadan: Evans. 
 
Azuh, Daniel C. and Soyibo, Adedokun, Comprehensive Certificate Commerce for Secondary Schools (3)  
 
Babatunde, A. H. (1999) Handbook on Commerce for Schools and Colleges, (First Edition), Global 

Publications. 
 
Ibru, G. M. (2004) Nigeria:  The Promise of Tourism, Lagos:  G.S.L. Publishing Limited. 
 
Igwe, P. M. et al (2004) Countdown to WASSCE/SSCE/NECO/JME Commerce, Ibadan: Evans. 
 
James, A. F. et al (1996) Management (Sixth Edition), New Delhi:  Prentice Hall). 
 
Nwachukwu, C. C. (1999) Management Theory and Practice, Onitsha:  Africana – First Publishers. 
 
Odedokun, M. O. et al (1999) Commerce for Senior Secondary Schools, Books 1 – 3, Lagos: Longman. 
 
Odoom, F. F. (1998) Commerce for Senior Secondary Schools, Books 1 – 3, Ibadan:  Onibonoje. 
 
Onifade, A. (2001) Management:  Office Business Education, Abeokuta: KAPPCO. 
 
Onu, A. J. C. (2000) Marketing Today, Abuja:  Precious Treasures Ltd. 
 
Pallister, J. and Isaacs, A. (eds) (2002) A Dictionary of Business (Third Edition), Oxford: Oxford 

University Press. 
 
Ubaka, O. A., (2012), Commerce Simplifiedfor SSS 1 – 3, WAEC, NECO, JAMB & NABTEB EXAMS, 

Garki, Abuja: Andyson Millennium Concepts Ltd. 
 
Longe,O.A (2020), Ikeja, Lagos: Essential Commerce for Secondary Schools; Tonad Publishers Limited. 
 
 
 
 

 

71


Economics 
 

ECONOMICS 
 

GENERAL OBJECTIVES 
 
The aim of the Unified Tertiary Matriculation Examination (UTME) syllabus in Economics is to 
prepare the candidates for the Board’s examination.  It is designed to test their achievement of the 
course objectives, which are to: 

1. Demonstrate sufficient knowledge and understanding of the basic concepts, tools and their 
general applications to economic analysis; 
 

2.   Identify and explain the basic structures, operations and roles of the various economic units 
and institutions (national and international); 

 
3.  Describe major economic activities – production, distribution and consumption; 

 
4.  Identify and appraise the basic and current economic problems of society;   

 
5.  Develop the competence to proffer solutions to economic problems identified. 

DETAILED SYLLABUS 
 

TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

  

1.    Economics as a science Candidates should be able to: 

       a.   Basic Concepts: (i) compare various concepts in economics 

            wants, scarcity, choice, scale of   and their applications; 
             preference, opportunity cost, rationality,  

(ii) interpret graphs/schedules in relation to 
              production, distribution consumption. 
 the concepts; 
     b.(i) Economic problems of: 

(iii) identify economic problems; 
            what, how and for whom to produce and   
            efficiency of resource use. (iv) proffer solutions to economic problems 
    b.(ii)Application of PPF to solution of economic          

 
           problems. 
  
 

Candidates should be able to: 
 2.  Economic Systems 

(i) compare the various economic systems; 
       a.   Types and characteristics of free  

(ii) apply the knowledge of economic 
             enterprise, centrally planned        

systems to contemporary issues in 
             and mixed economies  

Nigeria 
       b.    Solutions to economic problems under  

(iii) proffer solutions to economic problems 
               different systems 

in different economic systems. 
       c.    Contemporary issues in economic systems  

 

71 
 



Economics 
 

TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

               (economic reforms e.g deregulation,   

                banking sector consolidation, cash policy   

                reform).  

  

3.    Methods and Tools of Economic Analysis Candidates should be able to: 

       a.    Scientific Approach: (i) distinguish between the various forms of  

              i.   inductive and deductive methods reasoning; 

             ii.   positive and normative reasoning (ii) apply these forms of reasoning to real life 

 situations; 

       b.    Basic Tools  

              i.   tables, charts and graphs  (iii)  use the tools to interpret economic data; 

             ii.   measures of central tendency:  mean, (iv) analyse economic data using the tools; 

                   median and mode, and their       (v) understand the merits and demerits of the 

                   applications. tools. 

            iii.   measures of dispersion; variance,   

                    standard deviation, range and their   

                    applications;  

            iv.    merits and demerits of the tools.  

  

4.       The Theory of Demand Candidates should be able to: 

           a.   i.   meaning and determinants of demand (i) identify the factors determining demand; 

                ii.   demand schedules and curves (ii) interpret demand curves from demand 

               iii.   the distinction between change in  schedules; 

                       quantity demanded and change in  (iii) differentiate between change in quantity 

                       demand. demanded and change in demand; 

            b.   Types of demand: (iv) compare the various types of demand and 

                   Composite, derived, competitive and  their interrelationships; 

                   joint demand: (v) relate the determinants to the nature of 

            c.     Types, nature and determinants of  elasticity; 

                     elasticity and their measurement - (vi) compute elasticities; 

                     price, income and cross elasticity of  (vii)  interpret elasticity coefficients in relation 

                    demand: to real life situations. 

           d.   Importance of elasticity of demand to   

                 consumers, producers and government.  

  

  

72 
 



Economics 
 

TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

5. The Theory of Consumer Behaviour Candidates should be able to: 

a. Basic Concepts: (i) explain the various utility concepts; 

i. utility (cardinal, ordinal, total        (ii) apply the law of demand using the 

average and marginal utilities) marginal utility analysis;  

ii. indifference curve and budget  (iii) use indifference curve and marginal  

line. analyses to determine consumer 

 equilibrium; 

b. Diminishing marginal utility and the law (iv) relate the income and substitution effects; 

of demand. (v) apply consumer surplus to real life  

c. Consumer equilibrium using the situations. 

indifference curve and marginal  

analyses.  

d. Effects of shift in the budget line and the  

indifference curve.   

e. Consumer surplus and its applications.  

  

6.       The Theory of Supply Candidates should be able to: 

           a.    i.    Meaning and determinants of  (i)   identify the factors determining  

                        supply                  supply;  

                 ii.    Supply schedules and supply curves (ii)  interpret supply curves from supply 

                iii.    the distinction between change in  schedules; 

                        quantity supplied and change in    (iii) differentiate between change in quantity 

                        supply supplied and change in supply; 

           b.   Types of Supply: (iv) compare the various types of supply and 

                 Joint/complementary, competitive and    their interrelationships; 

                 composite  (v) relate the determinants to the nature of 

           c.    Elasticity of Supply: elasticity; 

                  determinants, measurements, nature and  (vi) compute elasticity coefficients;  

                  applications (vii) interpret the coefficients in relation to real 

 life situations. 

  

7. The Theory of Price Determination Candidates should be able to: 

a. The concepts of market and price (i) explain the concepts of market and price; 

b. Functions of the price system (ii) examine the functions of the price system; 

c. i.    Equilibrium price and quantity in    (iii) evaluate the effects of government 

       product and factor markets interference with the price system; 

73 
 



Economics 
 

TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

iii. Price legislation and its effects (iv) differentiate between minimum and 

d. The effects of changes in supply and  maximum price legislation; 

                  demand on equilibrium price and  (v) interpret the effects of changes in supply 

                   quantity. and demand on equilibrium price and 

e. Simple linear equation of demand and quantity. 

supply (vi) determine the equilibrium value of price 

 and quantity 

  

  

8. The Theory of Production Candidates should be able to: 

a. Meaning and types of production (i) relate TP, AP and MP with the law of 

b. Concepts of production and their variable proportion; 

interrelationships (TP, AP, MP and the (ii) compare internal and external economies 

law of variable proportion). of scale in production and their effects; 

c. Division of labour and specialization (iii) identify the types of production functions 

d. Scale of Production: (iv) compare the different types of returns to 

Internal and external economies of scale the scale and their implications; 

and their implications. (v) determine the firm’s equilibrium position 

e.  Production functions and returns to using the isoquant-isocost and marginal 

scale analyses. 

f. Producers’ equilibrium isoquant-isocost (vi) identify the factors affecting productivity. 

and marginal analyses.  

g. Factors affecting productivity.  

  

9. Theory of Costs and Revenue Candidates should be able to: 

a.  The concepts of cost: (i) explain the various cost concepts 

         Fixed, Variable, Total Average and         (ii) differentiate between accountants’ and 

         Marginal economists’ notions of costs 

b. The concepts of revenue: Total, Average (iii) interpret the short-run and long-run costs 

and Marginal revenue; curves 

c.  Accountants’ and Economists’ notions (iv) establish the relationship between marginal 

of cost cost and supply curve. 

d. Short-run and long-run costs (v) explain the various revenue concepts. 

e. The marginal cost and the supply curve  
 

of firm. 
 

  

74 
 



Economics 
 

TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

10. Market Structures Candidates should be able to: 
  
a. Perfectly competitive market: (i) analyse the assumptions and 

i.     Assumptions and characteristics; characteristics of a perfectly competitive 
                ii.      Short-run and long-run equilibrium market; 
                          of a perfect competitor; (ii) differentiate between short-run and long-
 run equilibrium of a perfectly competitive 

b.  Imperfect Market: firm; 
i.     Pure monopoly, discriminatory      (iii) analyse the assumptions and 
       monopoly and monopolistic  characteristics of imperfect markets; 
       competition. (iv) differentiate between the short-run and 

                ii.      Short-run and long-run equilibrium long-run equilibria of imperfectly 
                          positions. competitive firms; 
 (v) establish the conditions for the break- 

c. Break-even/shut-down analysis in the  even/shut down of firms. 
various markets.  

  
  

11. National Income Candidates should be able to: 
  
a. The Concepts of GNP, GDP, NI, NNP  (i) identify the major concepts in national 
b. National Income measurements and income; 

their problems (ii) compare the different ways of measuring 
c. Uses and limitations of national income national income; 

estimates (iii) examine their problems; 
d. The circular flow of income (two and (iv) determine the uses and limitations of 

three-sector models) national income estimates;  
e. The concepts of consumption, (v) interpret the circular flow of income 

investment and savings using the two and three-sector models; 
f. The multiplier and it effects (vi) calculate the various multipliers; 
g. Elementary theory of income (vii) evaluate their effects on equilibrium 

determination and equilibrium national national income; 
income. (viii) explain the concepts of consumption, 
 investment and savings. 
  

12. Money and Inflation Candidates should be able to: 
  
a. Types, characteristics and functions of (i) explain between the types, 

money  characteristics and functions of money; 
b. Demand for money and the supply of (ii) identify the factors affecting the 

money demand for and the supply of money; 
c. Quantity Theory of money (Fisher (iii) examine the relationship between the 

equation) value of money and the price level; 
d. The value of money and the price level (iv) identify the components in the quantity 
e. Inflation: Types, measurements, effects theory of money;  

and control (v) examine the causes and effects of 
f. Deflation: Measurements, effects and inflation; 

control. (vi) calculate the consumer price index; 
 (vii) interpret the consumer price index; 

 (viii) examine ways of controlling inflation. 
 (ix) examine the causes, measurement, 
 effects and control of deflation. 
  
  

75 
 



Economics 
 

TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

  
13. Financial Institutions  Candidates should be able to:  

  
a. Types and functions of financial (i) identify the types and functions of 

institutions (traditional, central bank, financial institutions; 
mortgage banks, merchant banks, (ii) explain the roles of financial institutions 
insurance companies, building in economic development; 
societies); (iii) distinguish between the money and 

b. The role of financial institutions in capital markets; 
economic development; (iv) identify the various financial sector 

c. Money and capital markets regulators and their functions; 
d. Financial sector regulations (v) explain the money creation process and 
e. Deposit money banks and the creation its challenges; 

of money (vi) examine the various monetary policy 
f. Monetary policy and its instruments instruments and their effects; 
g. Challenges facing financial institutions (vii) appraise the challenges facing the 

in Nigeria. financial institutions in Nigeria. 
  

  
14. Public Finance Candidates should be able to: 

  
a. Meaning and objectives (i) identify the objectives of public finance; 
b. Fiscal policy and its instruments (ii) explain fiscal policy and its instruments; 
c. Sources of government revenue (taxes (iii) compare the various sources of 

royalties, rents, grants and aids) government revenue; 
d. Principles of taxation (iv) analyse the principles of taxation; 
e. Tax incidence and its effects (v) analyse the incidence of taxation and its 
f. The effects of public expenditure effects; 
g. Government budget and public debts (vi) examine the effects of public 
h. Revenue allocation and resource control expenditure on the economy; 

in Nigeria. (vii) examine the types and effects of 
 budgets; 
 (viii) highlight the criteria for revenue 
 allocation in Nigeria and their impact.  

15. Economic Growth and Development  
 Candidates should be able to: 
a. Meaning and scope   
b. Indicators of growth and development (i) distinguish between economic growth 
c. Factors affecting growth and and development; 

development (ii) highlight the indicators of growth and 
d. Problems of development in Nigeria development; 
e. Development planning in Nigeria. (iii) identify the factors affecting growth and 

 development; 
 (iv) examine the problems of development in 
 Nigeria; 
 (v) examine the role of planning in 
 development; 
  
16. Agriculture in Nigeria Candidates should be able to: 

  
a. Types and features; (i) identify the types and features of 
b.  The role of agriculture in economic agriculture; 

development; (ii) examine the characteristics and problems 
c. Problems of agriculture; of agriculture; 

76 
 



Economics 
 

TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

d. Agricultural policies and their effects; (iii) assess the role of agriculture in economic 
e. Instability in agricultural incomes development; 

(causes, effects and solutions). (iv) appraise agricultural policies in Nigeria; 
 (v) evaluate the causes and effects of 

 instability in agricultural incomes. 
  
17. Industry and Industrialization  Candidates should be able to: 

  
a. Concepts and effects of location and (i) differentiate between location and 

localization of industry in Nigeria; localization of industry; 
b. Strategies and Industrialization in (ii) identify the factors influencing the 

Nigeria; location and localization of industry; 
c. Industrialization and economic (iii) examine the problems of 

industrialization; 
development in Nigeria; 

(iv) appraise some industrialization 
d. Funding and management of business strategies;  

(v) examine the role of industry in economic 
organization; 

development. 
e. Factors determining the size of firms.  

 
 

 
18. Natural Resources and the Nigerian Candidates should be able to: 

Economy  
 (i) trace the development of the major 
a. Development of major natural resources natural resources in Nigeria; 

(petroleum, gold, diamond, timber etc); (ii) understand the contribution of the oil and 
b. Contributions of the oil and the non-oil the non-oil sectors to the Nigerian 

sectors to the Nigerian economy; economy; 
c. Linkage effects; (iii) establish the linkages between the natural 
d. Upstream/downstream of the oil sector; resources and other sectors; 
e. The role of NNPC and OPEC in the oil (iv) analyse the environmental effects of 

sector; exploitation activities in Nigeria; 
f. Challenges facing natural resources (v) distinguish between the upstream and 

exploitation. downstream activities in the oil sector; 
 (vi) examine the roles of NNPC and OPEC in 
 the oil sector; 
 (vii) suggest ways of controlling the effects of 
 natural resources exploitation. 
  
  
19. Business Organizations  Candidates should be able to: 

  
a. Private enterprises (e.g., sole- (i) compare the types and basic features of 

proprietorship, private business organization; 
partnership, limited liability companies (ii) appreciate the financing and management 
and cooperative societies) problems of business organizations; 

b. Problems of private enterprises; (iii) identify the features of public enterprises; 
c. Public enterprises and their problems; (iv) identify the factors determining the size 
d. Funding and management of business of firms; 

organizations; (v) differentiate between privatization and 
e. Factors determining the size of firms; commercialization; 
f. Privatization and Commercialization as (vi) compare the advantages and 

solutions to the problems of public disadvantages of privatization and 
enterprises. commercialization; 

77 
 



Economics 
 

TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

  
20. Population  Candidates should be able to: 

  
a. Meaning and theories; (i) analyse some population theories: 
b. Census:  importance and problems. (ii) examine the relevance of the theories to 

Nigeria; 
c. Size and growth:  over-population, under- 

(iii) examine the uses and limitations of census 
population and optimum population. 

data; 
d. Structure and distribution;  

(iv) identify determinants of the size, composition 
e. Population policy and economic 

and growth of population; 
development. 

(v) analyse the structure and distribution of 
 

population; 
 

(vi) appraise government population policy in 
 

Nigeria. 
 

 
 

Candidates should be able to: 
21. International Trade 

(i) examine the basis for international trade. 
a. Meaning and basis for international trade 

(ii) differentiate between absolute and 
(absolute and comparative costs etc.) 

comparative advantages; 
b. Balance of trade and balance of 

(iii) distinguish between balance of trade and 
payments:  problems and corrective 

balance of payments and their corrective 
measures; 

measures; 
c. Composition and direction of Nigeria’s 

(iv) highlight the problems of balance of payments 
foreign trade; 

and their corrective measures; 
d. Exchange rate:  meaning, types and 

(v) examine the composition and direction of 
determination. 

Nigeria’s foreign trade;  
 

(vi) identify the types of exchange rates; 
 

(vii) examine how exchange rates are determined. 
 

 
 
  
22. International Economic Organizations Candidates should be able to: 
  

Roles and relevance of international  (i) identify the various economic organizations 
organizations e.g. ECOWAS, AU, EU, ECA, and their functions;  
IMF, EEC, OECD, World Bank, IBRD,  (vii) evaluate their relevance to the Nigerian 
WTO, ADB and UNCTAD etc. to Nigeria. economy. 

  
  

23.   Factors of Production and their Theories Candidates should be able to: 

  

a. Types, features and rewards; (i) identify the types; features and rewards of 

b. Determination of wages, interest and factors of productions; 

profits; (ii) analyse the determination of wages, interest 

c. Theories:  marginal productivity theory and profits; 

of wages and liquidity preference (iii) interpret the marginal productivity of liquidity 

theory; preference theories; 

d. Factor mobility and efficiency; (iv) examine factors mobility and efficiency; 

e. Unemployment and its solutions (v) examine the types and causes of 
unemployment in Nigeria; 

(vi) suggest solutions to unemployment in Nigeria. 
 

78 
 



Economics 
 

RECOMMENDED TEXTS 

Aderinto, A.A et al (1996) Economics: Exam Focus, Ibadan: University Press Plc. 

Black, J. (1997) Oxford Dictionary of Economics. Oxford: Oxford University Press 

Eyiyere, D.O. (1980) Economics Made Easy, Benin City, Quality Publishers Ltd. 

Fajana, F. et al (1999) Countdown to SSCE/JME Economics Ibadan: Evans 

Falodun, A.B. et al (1997) Round-up Economics, Lagos: Longman 

Kountsoyiannis, A. (1979) Modern Microeconomics, London: Macmillan 

Lipsey, R.G. (1997) An Introduction to Positive Economics, Oxford:  Oxford University Press. 

Samuelson, P and Nordhaus, W. (1989) Economics, Singapore: McGraw-Hill 

Udu E and Agu G.A. (2005) New System Economics: a Senior Secondary Course, Ibadan:  Africana FIRST 

Publishers Ltd. 

Wannacott and Wannacott (1979) Economics, New York: McGraw-Hill. 

Brownson-oton Richard (2010). What is Micro-Economics? Niky Printing and Publishing coy. 

Brownson-oton Richard (2010) What is Macro-Economics? Niky Printing and Publishing coy. 

 
 
   

 
 

 

79

Government 
 

GOVERNMENT 
 

GENERAL OBJECTIVES 
 
The aim of the Unified Tertiary Matriculation Examination (UTME) syllabus in Government is to 
prepare the candidates for the Board’s examination.  It is designed to test their knowledge in 
Government, with a view to determining their suitability for placement in institutions of higher 
learning in Nigeria. 

These objectives are to: 

i. appreciate the meaning of Government; 
ii. analyse the framework and specify the institutions of Government; 
iii. appreciate the basic principles of democratic governance and their application in Nigeria; 
iv. explain the concept of citizenship and define the duties and obligations of a citizen; 
v. appreciate the process of political development in Nigeria; 
vi. evaluate the political development and problems of governance in Nigeria; 
vii. understand the determinants and dynamics of foreign policy as they relate to Nigeria; 
viii. assess the role of Nigeria as a member of the international community and the workings of 

international organizations. 

 
DETAILED SYLLABUS 

 
PART 1: ELEMENTS OF GOVERNMENT 

 
TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

1. Definition and Scope of Government  Candidates should be able to: 
 i. define Government as an institution;  
 ii. state the characteristics of Government; 
 iii. explain the functions of Government. 
  

2. Basic Concepts of Government Candidates should be able to: 
a.  Power, Influence, Authority, i. identify the fundamental concepts in 

Legitimacy, Sovereignty; governance; 
b. Society, State, Nation, Nation-State; ii. analyse various political processes; 
c. Political Processes; iii. explain the relationship of the state to 

Political Socialization, Political Government. 
Participation, Political Culture.  
  

3. Forms of Government: Candidates should be able to: 
Monarchy, Aristocracy, Oligarchy, i. distinguish between different forms of 
Autocracy, Republicanism, Democracy- government. 
definitions, features, merits and demerits. ii. discuss the features of each of the forms of 
 Government. 

  
4. Arms of Government: Candidates should be able to: 

a. The Legislature – types, structure, 
functions, powers; 

94 
 



Government 
 

TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

b. The Executive – types, functions, i. identify the duties and obligations of the 
powers; various arms of government and their 

c. The Judiciary – functions, powers, agencies; 
components. ii. relate each arm to its functions; 

d. Their relationships iii. appreciate how these arms interrelates. 
  

5. Structures of Governance: Candidates should be able to: 
a. Unitary – features, reasons for i. compare the various political structures of 

adoption, merits and demerits governance; 
b.  Federal – features, reasons for ii. understand the reasons for the adoption of 

adoption, merits and demerits any of these structures of governance. 
c. Confederal - features, reasons for  

adoption, merits and demerits.  
  

6. Systems of Governance: Candidates should be able to: 
Presidential, Parliamentary and i. distinguish between the different systems of 
Monarchical, features, merits and governance; 
demerits. ii. analyse the features, merits and demerits of 
 each system of governance. 
  

7. Political Ideologies: Candidates should be able to: 
Communalism, Feudalism, Capitalism, i. differentiate between the major political 
Socialism, Communism, Totalitarianism, ideologies; 
Fascism, Nazism, Liberalism. ii. contrast their modes of production. 
  
  

8. Constitution: Candidates should be able to: 
Meaning, Sources, Functions, Types - i. Define and identify sources and functions of 
Written, Unwritten, Rigid and Flexible. constitutions; 

 ii. compare the nature of constitutions. 
  

9. Principles of Democratic Government: Candidates should be able to: 
Ethics and Accountability in Public i. identify the principles of democratic 
Office, Separation of Power, Checks and government; 
Balances, Individual and Collective ii. determine the application of these principles; 
Responsibility, Constitutionalism, Rule of  
Law, Representative Government,  
Centralization and Decentralization of  
Government.  
  

10. Processes of Legislation: Candidates should be able to: 
Legislative Enactments – Acts, Edicts, i. analyse the processes involved in the making 
Bye-laws, Delegated Legislation, Decrees. of laws. 
  

11. Citizenship: Candidates should be able to: 
a. Meaning, types; i. differentiate between the various methods of 
b. Citizenship rights; acquiring citizenship; 
c. Dual citizenship, renunciation, ii. specify the rights and responsibilities of a 

deprivation; citizen; 
d. Duties and obligations of citizens; iii. assess the obligations of the state. 
e. Duties and obligations of the state.  

  
12. The Electoral Process: Candidates should be able to: 

a. Suffrage – evolution, types; i. distinguish the different types of franchise 

95 
 



Government 
 

TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

b. Election – types, ingredients of free ii. identify and explain the types of electoral 
and fair election, pre- and post- systems; 
election crisis. iii. analyse the various electoral processes. 

c. Electoral System - types, advantages  
and disadvantages of each;  

d. Electoral Commission – functions,  
problems.  

  
13. Political Parties and Party Systems: Candidates should be able to: 

a. Political parties – Definition, i. assess the role of political parties; 
organization, functions. ii. distinguish between types of party systems. 

b. Party Systems – Definition,  
organization, functions, merits and  
demerits.  

  
14. Pressure Groups: Candidates should be able to: 

a. Definition, types, functions and i. evaluate the functions and the modus 
modes of operation. operandi of pressure groups; 

b. Differences between Pressure Groups ii. distinguish between pressure groups and 
and Political Parties. political parties. 

  
  

15. Public Opinion: Candidates should be able to: 
a. Meaning, formation and i. compare methods of assessing public 

measurement. opinion; 
b. Functions and limitations. ii. assess the functions of public opinion; 
 iii. analyse the limitations of public opinion. 

  
  

16. The Civil Service/Public Service: Candidates should be able to: 
a. Definition, characteristics, functions, i. analyse the significance of civil service in 

structure, control and problems of the governance; 
civil service. ii. distinguish between the civil service and 

b. Definition, characteristics, functions, public service. 
structure, control and problems of the  
public service.  

  
  
 

PART II POLITICAL  

DEVELOPMENT IN NIGERIA  
 

 Candidates should be able to: 
1. Pre – colonial Polities: i. appreciate the effectiveness of the pre-

Pre-jihad Hausa/Fulani Emirate, Tiv, Igbo, colonial political systems; 
Yoruba ii. compare pre-colonial systems of governance. 
a. Their structural organization;  
b. The functions of their various political  

institutions.  
  

2. Imperialists Penetration: Candidates should be able to: 
a. The British process of acquisition – i. trace the processes of imperialists 

trade, missionary activities, company penetration; 
rule, crown colony, protectorate; ii. assess the impact of British and French 

colonial policies; 

96 
 



Government 
 

TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

b. The British colonial administrative iii. distinguish between British and French 
policy – direct and indirect rule; colonial practices. 

c. The French colonial administrative  
policy – assimilation and association;  

d. Impact of British colonial rule-  
economic, political, socio-cultural;  

e. Comparison of British and French  
colonial administration.  

  
  
  

3. Process of Decolonization: Candidates should be able to: 
a. Nationalism – Meaning, Types; i. evaluate the process of decolonization; 
b. Nationalist Movements – emergence, ii. assess the roles of nationalist leaders and 

goals, strategies; parties; 
c. Nationalist Leaders – Herbert iii. assess the impact of external forces and 

Macaulay, Nnamdi Azikiwe, ideas (Pan-Africanism, Back–to–Africa 
Obafemi Awolowo, Ahmadu Bello, Movements, Second World War etc.). 
Ladipo Solanke, Aminu Kano, J. S.  
Tarka, Tafawa Balewa and others;  

d. Emergence of Nationalist Parties;  

e. Influence of external factors.  

  

  

4. Constitutional Development in Nigeria:  Candidates should be able to: 

a. Hugh Clifford Constitution (1922) i. compare the various constitutional 

b. Arthur Richards Constitution (1946) developments; 

c. John Macpherson Constitution (1951) ii. analyse the merits and demerits of each of 

d. Oliver Lyttleton Constitution (1954) the constitutions.  

e. Independence Constitution (1960)   

        Their features, merits and demerits.  

  

  

5. Post – Independence Constitutions: Candidates should be able to: 

1963, 1979, 1989 and 1999 (As Amended) i. assess the workings of the various 

characteristics and shortcomings. Constitutions; 

 ii. analyse the merits and demerits of the Post-

 Independence Constitutions in Nigeria. 

  

6. Institutions of Government in the Post – Candidates should be able to: 

Independence Nigeria: i. evaluate the operations of the Arms of 

a. The Legislative – structures, government and their agencies, e.g., the Civil 

functions and workings. Service, Armed Forces, Police, Courts and 

b. The Executive – structure, functions others. 

and workings.  

c. The Judiciary – structure, functions  

and workings.  

  

7. Public Commissions Established by the Candidates should be able to: 

1979 and Subsequent Constitutions: i. evaluate the operations of Public 

The Civil Service Commission, the Public Commissions; 

Complaints Commission, Electoral ii. assess the problems of the Public 

Commissions, National Boundary Commissions and their constraints.   

Commission, Independent Corrupt  

97 
 



Government 
 

TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

Practices and Other Related Offences  
Commission, Economic and Financial  
Crimes Commission and Others –  
objectives functions and problems.  
  
  

8. Political Parties and Party Politics in Candidates should be able to: 
Post-Independence Nigeria: i. contrast political processes in the republics; 
a. First Republic ii. evaluate the ideologies, structure and 
b. Second Republic composition of the political parties. 
c. Third Republic  
d. Fourth Republic  

- Evolution, membership spread,  
structure, etc.  

  
  

9. The Structure and Workings of Candidates should be able to: 
Nigerian Federalism: i. examine the workings of Nigerian 
a. Rationale for a Federal System;  federalism; 
b. Tiers of Government and their ii. identify its problems; 

relationship; iii. evaluate the corrective measures to be 
c. Creation of States – 1963, 1967, adopted. 

1976, 1987, 1991, 1996;  
d. Problems of Nigerian Federalism –  

Census, Revenue Allocation,  
Conflicts etc. solutions e.g. The  
Federal Character Principle, etc.  
  

10. Public Corporations and Parastatals: Candidates should be able to: 
a. Definition, types, purpose and i. examine the operations of public 

functions; corporations and parastatals; 
b. Finance, control and problems; ii. identify the processes involved in 
c. Deregulation, Privatization and privatization and commercialization; 

Commercialization – objectives, iii. assess the economic importance of 
features, merits and demerits; privatization and commercialization. 

d. Comparison between Public  
Corporations and parastatals.  
  

11. Local Government: Candidates should be able to: 
a. Local Government Administration i. trace the evolution and structure of Local 

prior to 1976; Government; 
b. Features of Local Government ii. identify the major problems faced by Local 

Reforms (1976, 1989) – structure, Governments; 
functions, finance and inter- iii. analyse the roles of Traditional Rulers in the 
governmental relations; Local Government system in Nigeria. 

c. Traditional Rulers and Local  
Governments;  

d. Problems of Local Government  
Administration in Nigeria.  
  

12. The Military in Nigerian Politics Candidates should be able to: 
a. Factors that led to military i. evaluate the reasons given for military 

intervention; intervention; 
b. Structure of military regimes; 

98 
 



Government 
 

TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

c. Impact of military rule – political, ii. assess the achievements of military rule; 
e.g. creation of states, NYSC, iii. determine the conditions that necessitated 
introduction of unitary system withdrawal from the political scene. 
(Unification Decree NO. 34) etc.  
economic, e.g. SAP, DFRRI, Peoples  
Bank, MAMSER, etc.  

d. Processes of military disengagement.  
  
  

PART III: FOREIGN POLICY AND  
NIGERIA’S RELATIONSHIP WITH THE 

 
INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY 

 
  
  

1. Foreign Policy: Candidates should be able to: 
- Definition, purpose, determining factors; i. Define foreign policy, identify and explain 

formulation and implementation. its determinants 
  
  

2. Nigeria’s Foreign Policy: Candidates should be able to: 
a. Relations with major powers; i. identify the major objectives of Nigeria’s 
b. Relations with developing countries, foreign policy. 

e.g. the Technical Aid Corps (TAC), ii. analyse Nigeria’s non-aligned posture 
Peace-Keeping Operations etc. during the cold war. 

c. Nigeria’s Non-Alignment Policy.  
  

  
3. Nigeria’s Relations with African Candidates should be able to: 

Countries: i. evaluate the role of Nigeria in continental 
a. Africa as the “centre piece” of affairs; 

Nigeria’s foreign policy – guiding ii. assess the role of NEPAD in developing 
principles, implementation and Africa. 
implications;  

b. NEPAD – origin, objectives and  
implications.  

  
4. Nigeria in International Organizations Candidates should be able to: 

a. The United Nations; i. analyse the dynamics of Nigeria’s 
b. The Commonwealth; involvement in international organizations; 
c. The Organization of African Unity; ii. assess their contribution to the development 
d. The African Union; of Nigeria. 
e. The Economic Community of West  

African States (ECOWAS);  
f. The Organization of Petroleum 

 
Exporting Countries (OPEC).  

 
 

PART IV:  INTERNATIONAL  

ORGANIZATIONS:  
  

1. International Organizations: Candidates should be able to: 
a. ECOWAS; i. evaluate the operations of these international 
b. OAU, AU; organizations; 
c. Commonwealth; 

99 
 



Government 
 

TOPICS/CONTENTS/NOTES OBJECTIVES 

d. OPEC; ii. assess the role of these organizations in world 
e. UNO; affairs; 
f. African Petroleum Producers iii. appreciate the challenges of these 

Association; organizations and how they can be overcome. 
- Origin, objectives, structure, functions, 

achievements, problems and prospects of 
these organizations. 

 
 

 

  

100 
 



Government 
 

RECOMMENDED TEXTS 

 

Adigwe, F (1985) Essentials of Government for West Africa, Ibadan:  University Press Plc. 

Anifowose, R and Enemuo, F. C. (eds)(1999) Elements of Politics, Lagos;  Malthouse Press 
Limited. 

Appadorai, A. (1978) The Substance of Politics, London:  Oxford University Press. 

Ball, A. R. (1983) Modern Politics and Government, London:  Macmillan. 

Christopher, O. (2022). Fundamental of Government A complete Guide for Schools and Colleges. 
Markins (Ugo) International Company Press, Delta State, Nigeria.  

Dibie, C. Chris (2020) Essential Government for Senior Secondary Schools, Ibafo, Ogun State; 
Tonad Publishers Limited. 

Gboyega, A; Obiyan, S. & Mimiko, F. (ed.) (2001) Exam Focus Government for WASSC & 
SSCE, Ibadan: Ibadan University Press Plc. 

Ofoegbu, R.  (1977) Government for the Certificate Year, London: George Allen and Unwin. 

Olawale, J. B (1987) New Topics on Ordinary Level Government, Ilesha:  Jola Publishing. 

Oluonye, A. U. (2023). Government Simplified Completely Revised and Expanded for Senior 
Secondary Schools SSS1-3. Andyson Press Limited, Garki-FCT-Abuja. 

Oyediran, O. Nwosu, H., Takaya, B., Anifowoshe, R., Femi, B., Godwill, O. and Adigun, A. 
(1990) Government for Senior Secondary Schools, Books 1, 2 and 3, Ibadan:  Longman. 

Oyeneye, I., Onyenwenu, M. and Olusunde, B. E. (2000) Round-Up Government for Senior 
Secondary School Certificate Examination:  A Complete Guide, Ibadan:  Longman. 

Oyovbaire, S., Ogunna, A. E. C., Amucheazi, E. C., Coker, H. O. and Oshuntuyi, O. (2001) 
Countdown to Senior Secondary Certificate Examination:  Government, Ibadan: Evans. 

 

101
 

 

 




64


